1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding
Yourself
Talks	given	from	1/2/80	to	29/2/80
Darshan	Diary
9	Chapters
Year	published:	None
Unpublished
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002015
ShortTitle:	WITHME01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
We	have	chosen	 the	colour	of	 the	morning	 for	 sannyas	 to	 symbolize	 that	 each
sannyasin	is	nothing	but	the	birth	of	a	new	sun.	This	is	only	the	beginning	of	a
long	long	journey.	If	you	allow,	then	much	can	happen,	but	it	all	depends	on	you,
on	how	much	you	allow.
It	is	very	difficult	to	allow	because	it	needs	trust,	the	same	trust	which	is	needed
by	a	child	to	come	out	of	the	womb	of	the	mother.	The	child	has	lived	for	nine
months	in	the	womb.	It	was	absolutely	comfortable,	cosy	and	now	suddenly	he
is	being	thrown	out	of	his	home.	but	he	takes	the	risk.	It	appears	to	be	death	in
the	beginning.	 It	 is	bound	to	appear	as	death	because	whatsoever	 the	child	has
known	as	life	is	disappearing.
He	 is	moving	 from	 the	 known	 into	 the	 unknown.	He	 does	 not	 know	 anything
about	where	he	is	going	and	what	is	going	to	happen	to	him.	all	is	in	the	dark,
but	still	he	takes	the	courageous	jump.
That's	 what	 is	 needed	 by	 a	 sannyasin,	 because	 it	 is	 a	 new	 birth	 and	 you	 are
moving	 in	 an	 unknown	 territory.	 To	 leave	 the	 ego	 aside	 is	 to	 leave	 all	 your
strategies	 of	 self-defence,	 security.	 It	 is	 to	 leave	 your	 mind,	 your	 knowledge,
your	experience.	It	is	to	leave	the	shore	on	which	you	have	lived	for	so	long	and
to	get	into	a	small	boat.	The	ocean	is	vast	and	there	is	every	kind	of	danger	and
the	other	shore	is	invisible.
There	is	more	possibility	that	you	will	be	drowned	than	reach	the	other	shore.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	if	one	takes	the	risk	then	in	that	very	moment	the	other	shore	is	reached	--
instantly,	immediately.
There	is	no	time	gap,	because	in	the	very	taking	of	that	risk	the	ego	is	dropped.
and	with	the	ego	the	old	disappears	totally,	leaving	no	trace	behind.
So	be	ready	for	 this	unknown	journey,	 this	pilgrimage	 to	 the	ultimate.	and	rise
like	a	sun,	unafraid,	fearless,	in	absolute	trust.
The	moon	represents	two	things	which	are	very	significant	for	a	sannyasin.	One
is	coolness.	A	sannyasin	has	 to	become	more	and	more	cool	 --	not	cold,	mind
you,	but	cool.	Coldness	is	death.	To	be	hot	is	one	extreme,	to	be	cold	is	another
extreme.	Passion	is	hot,	death	is	cold.	Exactly	between	the	two,	in	the	middle,	is
a	point	which	can	be	called	cool	if	you	compare	it	with	the	coldness	of	death.	It
can	be	compared	with	the	heat	of	passion,	then	it	can	be	called	warmth	--	but	it	is
the	same	point.	From	one	side	it	will	look	warm	from	the	other	side	it	will	look
cool.	At	that	point,	in	the	middle,	the	opposites	meet.	Coolness	and	warmth	are
both	there	--	warmth	because	one	is	alive	and	cool	because	one	is	not	mad.	That
is	one	of	the	qualities	of	the	moon.
And	the	second	quality	is	that	it	has	light	but	not	its	own.	It	simply	reflects	the
sun,	it	is	just	a	mirror.
A	sannyasin	has	 to	 reflect	God.	He	has	 just	 to	be	a	mirror.	His	 light	 is	not	his
own	 because	 he	 has	 no	 ego.	 He	 lives	 as	 a	 vehicle	 for	 God.	 He	 is	 totally
surrendered	to	God.	God's	will	is	his	only	will,	he	has	no	other	will.
So	these	two	qualities	have	to	be	remembered:	coolness	and	a	mirrorlike	quality.
Surrender	so	that	you	can	reflect	that	which	is.	If	these	two	things	are	achieved
life	is	fulfilled,	one	has	come	back	home.
Life	is	divine.	In	fact	life	and	God	are	synonymous.	There	is	no	God	except	life,
and	there	is	no	life	except	God;	they	are	two	terms	for	the	same	mystery.	But	for
centuries	religious	people	have	been	against	life.	They	were	living	with	the	idea
that	if	you	want	to	choose	God	you	have	to	renounce	life,	you	have	to	sacrifice
life	in	order	to	be	with	God.	That	is	utter	nonsense,	but	because	of	that	nonsense
millions	of	people	could	not	be	religious	because	they	could	not	renounce	life.	It
is	so	unnatural	to	renounce	it.	It	is	your	very	being	--	how	can	you	renounce	it?
So	 only	 very	 few	 people,	 who	 were	 pathological,	 neurotic,	 became	 religious.
The	 healthy	 person	 remained	 unreligious,	 he	 had	 to	 remain	 unreligious.	 The
religious	 people	 created	 such	 barriers	 for	 the	 healthy	 that	 only	 the	 ill,	 the
mentally	perverted	could	get	in.	Health	was	something	unspiritual.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	destroy	that	whole	nonsense	and	to	help	you	to	love
life.	Sannyas	 is	 not	 renunciation	of	 life	 but	 a	 tremendous	 love	 affair	with	 life.
The	deeper	you	live,	the	closer	you	come	to	God.
The	more	passionately	you	live,	the	more	divine	you	are.	The	intensity	of	your
life,	your	liveliness	is	the	only	way	to	reach	God.
Nothing	has	 to	be	renounced.	Everything	has	 to	be	 lived	with	deep	awareness,
with	totality,	with	understanding,	because	escape	is	not	a	way	of	growth;	hence
all	 the	 so-called	 saints	 who	 have	 escaped	 from	 life	 remain	 psychologically
immature.
Maturity	is	in	life,	in	all	its	bitterness	and	sweetness,	in	all	its	misery	and	joy,	in
its	 nights	 and	 days.	 One	 has	 to	 learn	 through	 these	 polarities	 to	 move	 alert,
conscious,	 so	 that	 one	 can	 remain	 balanced	 between	 the	 two,	 exactly	 in	 the
middle.
That's	what	sannyas	is.	It	is	not	renunciation.	It	is	rejoicing	in	life,	of	course	with
a	 different	 quality	 than	 ordinary	 people	 live	 it.	 Ordinary	 people	 live
unconsciously	--	a	sannyasin	tries	to	live	consciously.	That's	the	only	difference,
otherwise	both	live	the	same	life.
Denis	has	two	meanings	from	two	different	languages;	both	are	beautiful.
The	first	is	from	Assyrian.	In	the	assyrian	language	it	means	wise,	a	buddha,	one
who	 is	 awakened,	 one	 who	 knows.	 but	 even	 better	 than	 that	 is	 the	 Greek
meaning;	in	Greek	it	means	God	of	wine...	one	who	is	utterly	drunk,	drunk	with
the	 divine.	 Both	meanings	 become	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 phenomenon:	 the
moment	 you	 become	 wise	 and	 awakened	 you	 also	 become	 drunk,	 you	 also
become	a	God	of	wine,	so	drunk	that	there	is	no	way	to	come	back.	Once	gone
into	 it	 one	 is	 gone	 forever.	 One	 is	 so	 drunk	 with	 the	 divine	 that	 there	 is	 no
possibility	 of	 becoming	 sober	 again.	 and	 then	 life	 is	 a	 dance,	 a	 song,	 a
celebration.
It	is	a	beautiful	name	because	it	joins	two	aspects	of	spirituality	together.
That's	 my	 whole	 effort	 here:	 to	 make	 you	 wise	 and	 yet	 drunk,	 to	 make	 you
drunk,	yet	wise.	I	don't	want	to	separate	these	two	things.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Barbara	 literally	 means	 a	 stranger,	 an	 outsider.	 But	 symbolically	 it	 means
coming	with	 joy.	On	the	surface	 the	 literal	meaning	and	the	symbolic	meaning
don't	seem	to	be	joined	together,	but	deep	down	they	are	joined.
The	world	is	in	such	misery	that	whenever	somebody	comes	with	joy	he	appears
to	 be	 a	 stranger,	 an	 outsider.	 He	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	world.	 He	 lives	with
people	but	the	people	are	living	in	misery	and	he	lives	in	joy.	He	looks	exactly
like	the	others	but	he	is	not	like	the	others.	A	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra	--
these	are	strangers,	utter	strangers.	They	speak	a	different	language,	they	behave
in	a	different	way.	They	are	a	different	kind	of	being:	awakened,	alert,	blissful.
Hence	the	symbolic	meaning:	coming	with	joy.
A	sannyasin	has	to	both	a	stranger	in	the	world	of	misery	and	yet	he	has	not	to
escape	from	it.	Rather	than	escaping	from	the	world	of	misery	he	brings	joy	to
the	world,	he	shares	his	joy.
Sannyas	 is	 initiation	 into	 that	 space	where	one	 starts	belonging	 to	God,	where
one	 no	more	 thinks	 of	 oneself	 in	 egoistic	 terms,	 where	 one	 starts	 thinking	 in
terms	of	the	whole.	When	you	start	feeling	yourself	in	harmony	with	the	whole
great	 joy	 arises	 in	 the	 heart.	 Harmony	 is	 joy	 and	 disharmony	 is	 misery.
Whenever	we	are	not	in	tune	with	the	whole	there	is	misery.	Whenever	we	are
attuned	to	the	whole	suddenly	clouds	disappear	and	it	is	all	sunshine.	Suddenly
flowers	 start	 blooming	 in	 your	 heart,	 you	 are	 full	 of	 the	 fragrance	 of	 the
unknown,	of	the	beyond.	But	it	happens	only	in	those	moments	when	you	are	in
harmony.
And	everybody	knows	 those	moments	once	 in	a	while.	Of	course	 they	happen
accidentally.	 Just	watching	 a	 sunset	 you	may	 feel	 you	 are	 falling	 into	 a	 subtle
harmony.	Something	inside	you	may	become	quiet,	as	 the	sun	goes	down	your
inner	turmoil	may	settle	for	a	moment.	The	tremendous	beauty	of	the	sunset	may
overwhelm	you,	may	possess	you	so	deeply	and	so	totally	that	for	a	moment	you
forget	 that	you	are	separate,	 the	observer	becomes	 the	observed.	And	 then	you
feel	great	 joy	and	great	beauty	and	great	 silence.	This	happens,	but	 it	happens
only	accidentally,	once	in	a	while.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	means	 to	 learn	 the	 art	 of	 creating	 situations	where	 it	 starts
happening	more	and	more	and	more,	to	learn	the	secret	art	of	creating	the	right
space	for	it	so	that	one	day	it	happens	but	never	leaves	you	again.	That	is	the	day
of	enlightenment,	one	becomes	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.	The	day	the	harmony	has
become	 so	 engrained	 in	 you	 that	 now	 there	 is	 no	 more	 any	 possibility	 of
separation,	you	cannot	fall	back.
You	have	gone	beyond	the	point	of	no-return.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 birthday,	 and	 it	 is	 the	 birthday	 of	 Christ	 in	 you.	 But	 remember,
Christ	has	nothing	to	do	with	Christianity.	Christ	is	synonymous	with	Buddha.	It
simply	means	the	ultimate	state	of	consciousness.
The	birth	of	Jesus	 is	not	 the	birth	of	Christ,	 they	are	 two	different	phenomena.
The	birth	of	Jesus	is	one	thing	--	it	is	very	ordinary,	everybody	is	born	like	Jesus
--	but	the	birth	of	Christ	is	something	extraordinary.
The	birth	of	Christ	means	 that	 Jesus	disappears,	evaporates	and	allows	God	 to
take	possession	of	his	soul	totally.	The	moment	Jesus	says	'Thy	kingdom	come,
thy	will	be	done,'	Christ	is	born.	The	birth	of	Christ	means	the	death	of	the	ego.
Here	the	ego	dies	and	immediately,	instantly,	something	is	born	in	you	which	has
been	ready	to	be	born	for	many	many	lives,	but	was	hindered	because	of	the	ego.
Let	sannyas	be	the	death	of	the	ego	and	the	birth	of	Christ	in	you.
Real	nobility	arises	through	surrendering	to	God.	Real	nobility	has	nothing	to	do
with	birth,	with	heredity.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	blood.	It	has	something	to	do
with	a	deep	surrender	to	the	whole.	That	is	true	birth,	you	are	reborn.	As	an	ego
you	die.	Ego	is	ignoble,	egolessness	is	noble.	The	moment	you	die	as	an	ego	you
are	born	as	egolessness,	and	egolessness	is	tremendously	beautiful.	It	has	grace,
it	has	something	of	 the	beyond	 in	 it.	 It	 reflects	something	divine,	 it	becomes	a
mirror	for	God	and	in	that	very	reflecting	you	attain	to	nobility.
Only	a	sannyasin	can	be	noble,	because	only	a	sannyasin	can	be	reborn.	It	 is	a
spiritual	birth.	But	before	it	can	be	a	birth,	it	has	to	be	a	death.	Birth	is	possible
only	through	death.	First	crucifixion,	then	resurrection
--	that's	the	whole	process	of	sannyas.
The	 law	of	 inner	victory	 is	 very	 strange.	 In	 the	outer	world	 if	 you	want	 to	be
victorious	you	have	to	be	violent,	aggressive,	you	have	to	be	ready	to	fight.	 In
the	 inner	world	 just	 the	 opposite	 is	 the	 case:	 if	 you	want	 to	 be	 victorious	 you
have	to	forget	fighting,	you	have	to	drop	the	very	idea	of	fight.	You	are	not	to	be
violent,	you	have	to	be	loving,	non-violent,	compassionate.	In	a	single	word,	if
one	 is	 capable	 of	 surrendering	 then	 only	 does	 one	 become	 victorious	 in	 the
inward	journey.	Victory	comes	through	surrender,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
through	a	deep	let-go.
That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 a	 deep	 let-go,	 dropping	 all	 struggle,	 fight,
aggression,	ambition.	And	when	you	drop	all	these	things	suddenly	you	become
aware	 that	 the	 ego	 has	 evaporated,	 because	 the	 ego	 needs	 all	 these	 things	 as
supports,	as	nourishment.
The	outer	victory	is	nothing	but	an	ego	trip.	The	inner	victory	is	the	victory	of
egolessness.
Man	appears	to	be	a	mortal	--	he	is	not.	Death	is	the	most	false	phenomenon	in
existence,	because	nobody	has	ever	died.	Nobody	can	die	in	the	very	nature	of
things.	 Nothing	 ever	 dies,	 death	 is	 not	 possible	 at	 all.	 Life	 is	 eternal,
beginningless,	 endless.	But	 this	 can	be	known	only	 through	 the	grace	of	God.
You	 cannot	 know	 it	 through	your	 own	 efforts,	 your	 efforts	will	 be	 small.	You
cannot	 know	 it	 by	 your	 own	mind,	 your	mind's	 reach	 is	 small.	 But	 if	 God	 is
gracious	it	can	happen.
So	what	 is	needed	on	your	part	 is	 to	be	worthy	of	 receiving	God's	grace.	And
that's	what	my	whole	teaching	is,	to	be	receptive,	to	be	grateful,	to	be	open,	to	be
vulnerable,	so	that	when	God	knocks	on	your	door	the	doors	are	not	closed,	so
that	when	 he	 comes	 your	 eyes	 are	 not	 closed,	 so	 that	when	 he	 comes	 in	 your
heart	he	finds	you	waiting,	expectant.
Man's	efforts	are	small.	They	are	good	as	far	as	the	world	is	concerned,	man	can
do	many	things	in	the	world.	But	as	far	as	the	beyond	is	concerned,	man's	efforts
are	absolutely	irrelevant.
We	 can	 only	 allow	 God	 to	 take	 possession	 of	 us,	 we	 can	 allow	 him	 to	 do
whatsoever	he	wants	to	do.	We	can	be	in	a	let-go.	That	surrender	is	sannyas,	that
trust	 is	 sannyas,	 that	 infinite	 love	 is	 sannyas.	One	can	surrender	only	and	 love
only	if	there	is	infinite	love.
I	don't	say	to	believe	in	God.	I	say	experience.	Any	belief	not	rooted	in	your	own
experience	 is	 false.	 It	 is	dangerous.	 It	hinders	your	 true	experience;	 it	prevents
your	 search.	 It	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 be	 open	 to	 the	 truth,	 because	 you	 are
already	carrying	many	conclusions.
So	let	this	birth	of	sannyas	in	you	be	a	discontinuation	with	the	past.	Unlearn	all
that	 you	 have	 learned	 up	 to	 now.	 Forget	 your	 past,	 disconnect	 yourself,	 don't
look	back.	Look	in	the	moment,	in	the	present,	and	be	in	a	totally	relaxed	state,
available.	That	availability	makes	you	worthy.	God	comes	only	to	those	who	are
available	to	him.
To	 be	 available	 is	 to	 be	 prayerful.	 To	 be	 open	 and	 receptive	 is	 to	 be	 really
religious.
Praise	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	things	to	do	because	it	goes	against	the	ego.
The	 ego	wants	 to	 condemn,	 the	 ego	 is	 always	negative,	 it	 always	 looks	 at	 the
darker	side	of	things.	It	counts	the	thorns	in	a	rose	bush,	 it	 ignores	the	roses	--
and	if	you	ignore	them	then	they	don't	exist	for	you.
Praise	is	difficult	because	of	this,	the	ego	finds	it	almost	impossible	to	praise.	It
can't	look	at	the	positive	side	of	things.
Life	 has	 both,	 the	 negative	 and	 the	 positive.	 They	 can	 exist	 only	 in	 a
togetherness,	they	are	interdependent.	Now,	it	is	up	to	you	what	to	choose.	If	you
choose	the	negative	you	become	irreligious.
Then	your	life	is	a	condemnation,	a	condemnation	of	everything,	and	that	creates
misery.	 You	 are	 surrounded	 by	 a	 condemned	 existence.	 And	 nobody	 else	 is
responsible	for	it,	it	is	your	own	doing.	You	could	have	chosen	the	positive,	you
could	have	counted	the	roses,	you	could	have	ignored	the	thorns.	Then	naturally
praise	arises.	If	you	can	see	the	beauty,	the	joy	of	existence,	the	sheer	poetry	of
existence,	 the	music	of	 it	all,	 it	 is	 impossible	not	 to	praise.	But	 the	first	barrier
has	to	be	dropped.
So	my	message	 for	you	 is:	 if	 you	choose	 to	be	with	me	you	will	 have	 to	 risk
finding	 yourself,	 you	 must	 risk	 finding	 yourself.	 And	 the	 only	 way	 to	 find
oneself	is	to	risk	the	ego.	It	is	painful,	it	hurts.	You	have	lived	with	the	ego	for	so
long,	you	have	become	almost	one	with	it.	But	being	a	sannyasin	means	that	you
are	choosing	the	path	of	egolessness.	You	will	have	to	drop	all	that	is	implied	in
the	ego:	all	kinds	of	jealousies,	possessiveness,	hatred,	anger,	all	that	is	negative
and	dark,	all	that	creates	hell	in	you.	The	ego	is	the	source	of	all	hell.	Once	ego
disappears	you	are	in	paradise	again.
And	by	being	a	sannyasin	you	are	choosing	me.	So	remember	it,	if	you	choose
to	be	with	me	you	must	risk	finding	yourself.
But	only	in	the	beginning	does	it	look	as	if	you	are	risking	something,	because
the	ego	is	a	false	entity.
The	master	 asks	 only	 that	 the	 false	 should	 be	 surrendered	 so	 that	 the	 real	 can
take	possession	of	you.	The	moment	you	drop	the	false	you	become	the	real.	The
real	is	repressed	by	the	false.	The	false	is	sitting	on	the	chest	of	the	real,	almost
killing	it.	The	real	is	suffocated	inside	you,	it	needs	to	be	released.	The	false	has
become	the	prison,	the	prison	has	to	be	broken,	demolished.	Howsoever	painful
the	process	is	it	is	tremendously	paying,	ultimately.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
A	sannyasin	should	not	look	for	the	close,	nearby	result.	He	should	have	a	longer
vision,	we	should	see	things	in	the	ultimate	sense.	Then	life	starts	going	through
a	radical	transformation.
If	you	have	a	very	short	vision	non-essential	things	seem	to	very	essential.	If	you
have	 longer	 vision,	 a	 deeper	 insight,	 then	 the	 case	 is	 just	 the	 opposite:	 the
essential	becomes	important,	the	intrinsic	becomes	important.	The	non-essential
and	 the	 accidental	 become	 almost	 so	 unimportant	 that	 they	 disappear,	 they
wither	away	by	themselves.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
(The	reply	is	audible	only	to	Osho)
--	That's	good,	be	here	as	long	as	possible...	and	risk	as	much	as	possible!
Curtis	has	two	meanings.	One	is,	fit	for	the	court	life.
The	Sufis	call	the	assembly	of	fellow	travellers,	a	court.	It	is	really	a	court.	The
courts	of	the	kings	are	nothing	compared	to	it,	this	is	a	court.	The	Sufi	word	for
court	 is	 "darbar."	 And	 one	 needs	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 very	 gracious	 to	 be	 in	 the
presence	of	a	master.	Where	people	are	praising	God,	communing	with	God,	one
has	to	be	very	soft,	vulnerable,	feminine.
And	 the	 second	 meaning	 is	 one	 who	 is	 gracious.	 Both	 are	 connected.	 In	 the
courts	of	the	kings	a	formal	grace	is	needed,	mannerism,	etiquette.	But	they	are
superficial.	 In	 the	 court	 of	 a	master	 inner	 grace	 is	 needed,	 an	 inner	 silence,	 a
prayerful	heart.	One	has	to	become	a	temple.	So	sacred	is	the	inner	silence	that	it
makes	 you	 a	 temple.	One	 has	 to	make	 a	 cave	 in	 one's	 heart	 for	 the	master	 to
dwell	in.
Real	grace	is	needed,	authentic	grace	is	needed.	A	sannyasin	has	to	live	the	life
of	inner	grace.
To	be	a	disciple	is	something	revolutionary,	because	it	is	getting	out	of	the	prison
of	 your	 ego,	 it	 is	 surrender.	 It	 is	 a	 transformation	because	 it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 in
love.
You	can	surrender	yourself	only	when	there	is	total	love.	It	is	only	through	love
that	trust	arises,	and	only	when	there	is	trust	and	the	climate	of	trust,	is	surrender
possible.
Sannyas	 is	 initiation	 into	 being	 a	 disciple.	 The	 word	 "disciple"	 means	 the
capacity	 to	 learn.	The	 egoist	 never	 learns;	 he	 cannot,	 he	 is	 closed.	One	 learns
only	in	egolessness.	That's	the	whole	secret	of	disciplehood.
Malcolm	literally	means	a	disciple	of	Saint	Colomba,	a	sixteenth	century	saint.
Malcolm	 was	 his	 closest	 disciple,	 but	 he	 never	 called	 himself	 Colomba's
disciple,	only	a	servant.	He	was	happy	just	 to	serve	 the	master,	 it	was	enough.
He	learned	everything	from	the	master	just	by	being	close	to	him,	serving	him,
never	asking	a	question,	never	needing	any	answer.	He	was	absolutely	blissful
just	to	be	allowed	to	be	close,	to	serve.
Hence	symbolically	the	name	Malcolm	has	taken	on	a	very	significant	meaning.
Symbolically	 it	 means	 one	 who	 is	 capable	 of	 learning	 without	 being	 taught.
That's	exactly	 the	definition	of	a	real	sannyasin,	a	real	disciple:	 the	capacity	 to
learn	without	being	taught.
If	you	are	taught	then	you	are	a	student.	If	you	learn	without	being	taught	then
you	are	a	disciple.	If	somebody	teaches	you	he	is	only	a	teacher,	a	professor.	But
if	somebody's	presence	is	a	teaching	then	he	is	a	master.
So	 become	 a	 Malcolm	 again.	 By	 entering	 into	 sannyas	 enter	 into	 that	 space
where	being	close	is	enough.
Just	to	be	in	the	presence	is	enough.	If	there	is	no	argument	inside	you,	no	doubt,
if	 there	 is	 love	 and	 trust,	 then	 just	 serving	 the	 master,	 just	 following	 the
instructions,	whatsoever	 he	 says,	 just	 being	 obedient	 is	 enough.	One	 becomes
awakened	by	this	simple	process.
One	day	the	disciple	disappears	and	at	the	very	core	of	your	being	you	find	the
master,	the	master	of	all	masters.
Man	appears	very	small	--	he	is	not.	That	is	only	an	appearance.	He	is	as	vast	as
the	sky	itself,	he	contains	 the	sky	in	him.	But	we	have	become	too	attached	to
the	illusion	of	being	small.	We	have	become	identified	with	the	body.	The	body
is	perfectly	good	as	far	as	it	goes,	but	we	are	not	it.	We	are	in	it	as	much	as	we
are	out	of	it.
The	sky	is	not	confined	to	your	courtyard;	it	is	in	your	courtyard	certainly,	but	it
is	 outside	 the	 courtyard	 too.	 In	 reality	 the	 sky	 is	 not	 in	 the	 courtyard	 but	 the
courtyard	is	in	the	sky.	And	so	is	the	case	with	man.
The	soul	is	not	within	you,	you	are	within	the	soul	The	body	is	in	God,	not	vice
versa.	 It	 appears	 so	because	we	are	not	very	aware,	 alert.	We	have	not	 looked
minutely	enough.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 simply	means	 to	watch	your	 identification	with	 the	body	and	mind
very	closely.	And	as	you	watch	you	become	aware.	What	I	am	saying	is	simply	a
fact,	it	is	not	a	theory.	I	don't	believe	in	theories.	I	have	all	respect	for	the	facts
but	no	respect	for	any	hypothesis.
So	 watch,	 and	 come	 to	 realise	 on	 your	 own,	 not	 because	 I	 say	 that	 it	 is	 so.
Experience	that	you	are	not	in	the	body	but	that	the	body	is	in	you,	the	mind	is	in
you,	and	you	are	 the	whole	sky.	And	not	only	 is	 this	body	within	you,	but	 the
stars	and	the	sun	and	the	moon	are	all	within	you.	To	experience	this	is	liberation
because	 one	 is	 liberated	 from	 all	 boundaries,	 all	 confinements,	 all	 prisons,	 all
limits.
To	be	limited	is	to	be	miserable.	Misery	means	limitation.	Whenever	we	feel	the
limit	misery	arises.
Bliss	means	feeling	unlimited.	No	limits,	that's	the	definition	of	bliss.	And	that	is
our	 true	 nature,	 so	 it	 is	 not	 difficult	 to	 attain	 it.	 All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a	 little
awakening.	We	are	asleep.
Sannyas	means	initiation	into	a	certain	path	where	awakening	is	possible,	where
methods	and	devices	are	used	to	wake	you	up,	where	other	awakened	people	are
trying	to	wake	the	sleeping	ones.	And	remember,	only	one	who	is	awakened	can
help	you	to	wake	up.
No	sleeping	person	can	wake	another	sleep	person,	that	is	impossible:	he	himself
is	asleep.	Hence,	unless	you	can	find	an	awakened	person	there	is	no	possibility
of	your	being	awakened.	But	there	are	always	awakened	people	available.	Just	a
little	search,	a	little	authentic	thirst	and	you	are	bound	to	find	one.
Now	 you	 are	 entering	 into	 a	 world,	 a	 totally	 different	 world.	 You	 are	 not
acquainted	 with	 it.	 You	 are	 moving	 from	 the	 sleeping	 world	 to	 the	 world	 of
awakening.	 That	 is	 initiation:	 your	 desire	 to	 wake	 up	 and	 the	 presence	 of
somebody	awakened	who	can	fulfil	your	desire.
The	whole	 process	 of	 sannyas	 is	 that	 of	 awakening.	We	 are	 asleep,	 not	 in	 the
ordinary	sense	but	in	a	metaphysical	sense.	We	don't	know	who	we	are,	how	can
we	be	called	awake?	We	don't	know	from	where	we	are	coming,	how	can	we	be
called	awake?	We	don't	know	where	we	are	going,	how	can	we	be	called	awake?
We	don't	know	anything	 that	 is	essential.	We	know	much	 that	 is	 rubbish	--	we
know	everything	about	the	moon	and	the	sun	and	the	earth	and	we	know	history
and	geography	--	but	we	know	nothing	about	ourselves.	We	know	nothing	about
the	knower	--	and	that	should	be	the	primary	concern	of	any	real	education.
Sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	a	real	education.	The	fundamental	is	that	you	have
to	become	aware	of	yourself,	of	who	you	are.	And	only	you	can	do	that.
I	indicate	the	way,	I	can	call	you	forth.	You	must	have	heard	the	story...	Lazarus
died	but	his	sisters,	Mary	and	Martha,	waited	for	Jesus	to	come.	They	had	great
trust	 that	he	would	come	and	he	would	call	Lazarus	 forth	 from	death,	back	 to
life.	The	whole	village	was	laughing	at	their	stupidity:	how	can	you	revive	a	man
who	is	dead?	But	they	waited.
Jesus	came...	Lazarus'	dead	body	was	kept	in	a	cave.	Jesus	went	close	to	the	cave
and	from	outside	he	shouted	loudly	"Lazarus,	come	out!"	The	story	is	beautiful.
The	whole	village	had	gathered	 to	 see;	 they	saw	Lazarus	coming	out	 from	 the
cave,	almost	dazed,	as	if	he	had	been	fast	asleep	for	four	days,	as	if	he	had	been
drunk.	He	was	shaky,	trembling,	but	he	came	out.
The	most	significant	thing	about	the	story	is	not	that	a	dead	man	becomes	alive.
that	 is	 only	 a	parable,	 not	 a	 fact.	The	 significant	 thing	 is	 that	 Jesus	 calls	 forth
"Lazarus,	come	out!"	Lazarus	has	to	come	out,	Jesus	can	only	call	forth.	He	can
only	shout,	you	have	to	listen.
My	whole	effort	here	 is	 to	call	 forth	Lazaruses.	Everybody	is	dead	and	asleep,
and	everybody	is	lying	dead	in	a	cave.	The	cave	of	your	heart,	that	is	where	you
are	lying	dead.
I	 can	 call	 you	 forth	 but	 you	 will	 have	 to	 come	 out,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 gather
enough	courage	to	come	out	of	the	darkness,	out	of	centuries-old	habits,	out	of	a
long	long	sleep.
And	when	you	are	awake,	life	is	a	dance,	a	song,	a	bliss,	a	benediction.
The	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas	is	to	become	a	god	of	peace,	to	attain	the	kingdom
of	peace.	Peace	means	transcending	dualities.
Mind	 lives	 in	 dualities	 --	 pain	 -pleasure,	 love-hate,	 success-failure,	 richness-
poverty,	birth-death,	and	so	on,	so	forth.	Mind	lives	in	dualities.	Mind	exists	only
between	two	poles	as	a	tension.	Mind	is	a	tension	between	two	polarities.
When	you	see	the	point,	that	mind	is	a	tension	between	two	polarities,	you	stop
choosing,	because	to	choose	one	is	to	choose	the	other	also;	the	other	comes	in
the	 bargain,	 you	 cannot	 avoid	 it.	 Although	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 do	 that.
Everybody	wants	to	choose	one	out	of	the	two	polarities	and	avoid	the	other.
That	 is	 impossible.	It	 is	 like	my	choosing	you	and	avoiding	your	shadow.	That
cannot	be	done.	If	I	invite	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
you,	your	shadow	is	automatically	invited,	it	is	bound	to	come	with	you.
When	you	 invite	 pleasure	you	 invite	 pain,	when	you	 invite	 success	 you	 invite
failure.	 Whatsoever	 you	 invite	 the	 opposite	 comes.	 In	 fact	 they	 cannot	 exist
separately.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	 separate	 them,	 no	 divorce	 is	 possible.	 They	 are
really	married,	and	married	in	a	very	old-fashioned	way,	when	divorce	was	not
in	existence	anywhere.	They	don't	know	how	to	divorce.
Seeing	 this	 one	 stops	 inviting.	 One	 becomes	 choicelessly	 aware,	 one	 stops
choosing.	Still	 things	will	 come,	 but	 one	 simply	watches	 them.	One	 is	 neither
clinging	to	them	nor	pushing	them	away.	One	says	nothing,	neither	yes	nor	no.
One	 is	 neither	 a	 friend	 nor	 a	 foe.	 You	 simply	 look	 unconcerned,	 as	 if	 it	 has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 you.	 That	 cool	 awareness	 brings	 peace.	 Slowly	 slowly	 it
deepens,	it	becomes	so	deep	that	even	the	Pacific	is	not	so	deep.
In	those	depths,	unfathomable	depths,	God	is	found.	God	is	not	available	on	the
surface.	God	is	such	a	treasure,	it	can't	be	available	on	the	surface.	It	is	hidden	in
the	 deepest	 core	 of	 your	 being	 --	 and	 only	 peace	 can	 lead	 you	 there.	And	 the
miracle	is:	when	the	seeker	comes	to	know	God,	he	becomes	God.	The	knower
becomes	 the	known,	 the	observer	becomes	 the	observed,	 the	 seer	becomes	 the
seen.	 The	 separation	 disappears.	 Then	 you	 and	 God	 are	 one.	 It	 is	 in	 such
moments	that	the	seers	of	Upanishads	declared	"Aham	Brahmasmi"	--	I	am	God.
Al	 Hillaj	 Mansoor	 declared	 "Ana'l	 Haq"	 --	 I	 am	 truth.	 Jesus	 says	 "I	 and	 my
father	in	heaven	are	one."
All	the	mystics	of	all	the	countries	and	of	all	the	ages	have	been	saying	the	same
thing,	that	in	your	profoundest	depth	you	are	a	god.	On	the	surface	you	are	just	a
beggar,	on	the	circumference	you	are	a	beggar;	at	the	centre	you	are	a	god.	but	to
go	to	the	centre	means	you	will	have	to	learn	the	art	of	being	aware,	choicelessly
aware.	That's	what	meditation	is	all	about,	that's	the	essential	core	of	sannyas.
Living	in	freedom	--	that's	exactly	the	definition	of	sannyas.
Now	remember	to	break	all	 the	chains,	destroy	all	 the	walls	 that	surround	you.
Come	out	of	the	prison	of	your	mind,	come	under	the	open	sky	of	the	heart.
Mind	 knows	 only	 slavery.	 It	 can't	 taste	 freedom.	 It	 is	 a	 prisoner,	 it	 loves	 dark
holes,	the	darker	the	better,	the	smaller	the	better.	It	feels	more	protected,	more
safe.	To	the	mind	the	dark	black	hole	seems	to	be	cosy.
It	 is	 the	heart	 that	 is	capable	of	knowing	freedom.	To	be	really	free	one	has	 to
move	 from	 the	 mind	 to	 the	 heart,	 from	 thought	 to	 feeling.	 There	 is	 one	 still
higher	plane,	higher	than	feeling	--	and	that	is	the	plane	of	being.
Mind	knows	slavery	--	one	lives	in	slavery.	The	heart	knows	freedom	--	one	lives
in	freedom.	But	going	beyond	the	heart,	the	ultimate	is	not	being	free	but	being
freedom	That	is	totally	different	dimension.	But	one	cannot	take	the	jump	from
the	 mind	 to	 the	 being	 directly.	 One	 has	 to	 go	 through	 the	 heart.	 The	 heart
functions	as	a	bridge.
Living	 in	 the	 heart	 you	 start	 learning	 the	ABC	of	 freedom,	 you	 start	 enjoying
freedom,	you	open	your	wings.	You	go	a	 little	beyond	 the	boundaries	and	you
will	come	back	again	and	you	go	a	little	further.
Slowly	 slowly	 you	 become	 accustomed	 to	 the	 beauty	 of	 freedom.	 Then	 the
ultimate	quantum	leap	can	be	taken.	Then	you	simply	become	one	with	freedom.
Then	 you	 are	 not	 free	 --	 even	 that	 separation	 is	 no	 more	 there,	 then	 you	 are
simply	freedom.	Buddha	calls	it	nirvana,	total	freedom.
That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Sannyas	 is	 the	 beginning	 of	 freedom:	 freedom	 from	 politics,	 freedom	 from
religion,	freedom	from	all	kind	of	bondages.	It	is	entering	into	universality,	it	is
dropping	the	local	boundaries.	A	sannyasin	is	neither	an	Indian	nor	an	American
nor	a	Greek,	he	is	simply	human.	He	is	neither	white	nor	black	because	he	is	not
the	body,	and	he	is	not	a	christian	or	a	Hindu	because	these	ideologies	exist	only
in	the	mind	and	sannyas	means	disidentification	from	the	mind.
The	moment	you	know	"I	am	neither	the	body	nor	the	mind,"	you	have	become
free.	And	freedom	brings	peace,	bliss	and	ultimately	God.
Only	 the	 rebellious	 spirit	 comes	 to	 release	 its	 fragrance.	 The	 non-rebellious
remains	 in	 bondage,	 and	 in	 bondage	 there	 is	 no	 fragrance.	 Bondage	 stinks,
freedom	 has	 fragrance.	 Bondage	 is	 ugly,	 freedom	 has	 beauty.	 And	 only	 the
rebellious	spirit	can	be	free.
All	the	social	forces	are	against	individual	freedom.	Society	exists	by	destroying
individuals	So	one	who	knows	this	strategy,	this	situation,	has	to	find	ways	and
means	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 prison	 that	 the	 society	 and	 the	 church	 and	 the	 state
conspire	to	build	for	everyone.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
There	are	loopholes	and	the	function	of	the	master	is	to	show	you	the	loopholes
from	which	 you	 can	 escape.	 There	 are	 a	 few	 doors	which	 you	 have	 not	 seen,
which	are	unguarded.	There	are	a	few	guards	who	can	be	bribed,	there	are	a	few
guards	who	are	absolutely	drunk,	and	if	you	escape	they	will	not	even	be	able	to
see	you.	There	are	means	and	methods	to	cross	over	the	wall.	There	are	people
outside	 the	prison	 --	 those	people	are	 the	masters,	 the	Buddhas	 --	and	one	can
contact	them.
Being	 initiated	 into	 sannyas	 means	 that	 you	 are	 trying	 to	 communicate	 with
someone	who	is	outside	 the	prison,	because	only	somebody	who	is	outside	 the
prison	can	help	you	 to	come	out.	He	may	 supply	a	 rope	and	a	 ladder,	he	may
show	you	the	way	he	has	escaped.	But	one	has	to	learn	the	language	of	rebellion.
Revolution	is	social,	rebellion	is	 individual.	Revolution	is	political,	rebellion	is
spiritual.	Revolution	intends	to	change	the	social	structures	on	the	outside;	it	is
extrovert.	 Rebellion	 changes	 your	 consciousness,	 it	 changes	 your	 subjectivity,
your	way	of	looking	at	things.	It	changes	you	in	your	very	fundamentals,	at	your
very	roots.	And	when	you	are	free,	you	start	blooming	--	 the	spring	has	come!
And	the	fragrance	that	has	always	been	there	within	you	is	released.
That	is	the	contribution	of	an	enlightened	person	to	existence:	the	fragrance	that
he	releases	into	the	world.
Andreas	means	courageous.
This	is	the	first	disciple	of	Jesus,	Andreas.	He	called	Andreas	his	first	disciple.
And	this	is	significant,	because	only	a	courageous	person	can	follow	a	man	like
Jesus.	Great	courage	is	needed	to	follow	an	enlightened	man.	It	 is	moving	into
danger,	insecurity.	It	is	moving	beyond	the	boundaries	created	by	the	society,	the
church,	the	state.	It	is	a	transcendence	of	all	limits.
Within	 limits	 one	 can	 function	 easily,	 without	 any	 danger,	 because	 one	 is
familiar	with	 it,	one	has	been	educated	 for	 it,	 conditioned	 for	 it,	 trained	 for	 it.
When	you	move	into	the	new	you	are	again	a	child	and	you	have	to	learn	from
ABC.	Only	very	courageous	people,	who	are	ready	to	learn	and	who	are	always
ready	to	learn,	can	be	initiates.
Sannyas	is	initiation	into	the	beyond...	which	is	not	visible,	which	is	not	tangible,
which	cannot	be	proved,	which	can	only	be	felt	by	a	loving	heart.	It	cannot	be
argued	 about,	 no	 proofs	 can	 be	 proposed	 for	 it	 because	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of
mind	at	all.	It	is	a	question	of	going	beyond	mind.	Mind	creates	limits	--	and	it	is
going	beyond	all	the	limits	created	by	the	mind.
Mind	 is	 part	 of	 the	 society.	 Mind	 is	 an	 agent	 of	 the	 society	 within	 you.	 It
functions	for	the	society.	It	is	like	an	electrode	which	has	been	implanted	in	you.
One	 scientist,	 Delgado,	 has	 done	 many	 experiments	 with	 electrodes,	 very
dangerous	experiments.
Sooner	or	 later	 they	are	going	 to	be	used	on	human	beings.	 In	fact	society	has
been	using	these	ideas	for	thousands	of	years	in	a	different	way	--	not	so	crude,
very	subtle,	but	they	have	been	used.	Delgado	brought	it	to	a	very	clear-cut	focus
and	 now	 some	 decision	 has	 to	 be	 taken.	 It	 is	 far	 more	 dangerous	 than	 what
Albert	Einstein	and	Rutherford	and	others	did	in	creating	the	atom	bomb.	What
Delgado	has	done	 is	 far	more	dangerous,	but	we	 recognise	dangers	only	when
they	have	done	their	wrong.
Albert	 Einstein	 was	 very	 unhappy	 and	 repentant	 when	 he	 died.	 He	 had	 not
thought	 that	 he	 would	 become	 the	 cause	 of	 such	 murder	 as	 Hiroshima	 and
Nagasaki.	But	once	a	certain	 truth	 is	known	 it	 is	bound	 to	be	exploited	by	 the
politicians:	they	immediately	jump	upon	it.	It	becomes	their	possession.
Delgado	has	 done	 an	 experiment...	 the	mind	has	 different	 centres	 for	 different
things.	 You	 put	 an	 electrode	 in	 a	 particular	 centre	 and	 the	 mind	 immediately
functions	 from	 that	 centre.	 For	 example	 if	 he	 touched	 your	 brain	 centre	 at	 a
certain	 point	 you	 may	 start	 remembering	 your	 childhood	 immediately.	 The
moment	 the	electrode	 is	 taken	out	 the	memory	stops.	Put	 the	electrodes	on	 the
same	point	again	and	the	same	memory	starts	up	again	from	the	beginning,	as	if
it	 were	 just	 a	 gramophone	 record	 --	 with	 only	 one	 difference,	 that	 it	 has	 an
automatic	mechanism	 to	go	back	 to	 the	beginning.	You	 take	 the	electrode	out,
the	memory	immediately	goes	back	to	the	beginning.	Put	the	electrode	on	again;
the	memory	doesn't	 start	 from	where	you	stopped	 it,	 it	 starts	again	from	ABC,
from	the	very	beginning.
Now	these	electrodes	can	be	put	in	the	mind	without	your	knowing	it.	Each	child
in	the	hospital	can	be	operated	on	--	a	small	operation	--	and	an	electrode	can	be
put	 there.	 That	 electrode	 can	 be	 manipulated	 from	 far	 away,	 through	 radio
waves.	Now	 the	whole	 army	could	be	ordered	 to	do	 anything	 It	would	 follow
immediately;	everybody	would	think	that	he	was	choosing	to	do	it	but	it	would
be	just	the	order	given	to	the	electrode	through	radio	waves.
Delgado	 showed	 his	 experiment	 in	 a	 public	 exhibition.	 In	 Spain	 he	 fixed	 the
electrode	inside	the	head	of	a	bull	and	then	he	showed	a	red	flag	to	the	bull.	The
bull	rushed	towards	him,	mad.	Thousands	of	people	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
had	gathered	to	see	the	experiment,	and	he	was	standing	there	without	any	arms
or	anything,	just	a	small	mechanism	in	his	hand,	nobody	could	even	see	it,	there
were	 just	 two	or	 three	buttons	on	 it.	Just	as	 the	bull	was	reaching	him,	he	was
just	one	foot	away,	Delgado	pushed	the	button	and	the	bull	stopped	there,	almost
frozen.	 Now	 this	 is	 something	 tremendously	 significant	 for	 the	 future	 of
humanity.	 In	 Soviet	 Russia,	 in	 China,	 in	 communist	 countries	 they	may	 have
already	started	fixing	electrodes	inside	small	children's	heads.
You	will	grow	with	those	electrodes,	you	will	never	know	that	you	are	carrying
them,	and	from	the	Kremlin	they	can	be	manipulated	by	remote	control.
But	 this	 has	 been	 done	 for	 centuries.	 society	 calls	 it	 conscience.	 It	 is	 a	 long
process	 that	 the	 society	 has	 been	 involved	 in,	 because	 it	 was	 not	 aware	 that
short-cuts	could	be	found	through	the	brain	centres.
Children	have	 to	be	conditioned	 for	years,	 then	 they	become	Jews	and	Hindus
and	Mohammedans	and	Communists.
The	mind	is	nothing	but	an	agent	of	the	society	inside	you.	One	has	to	go	beyond
the	mind,	then	only	does	one	become	oneself	and	is	no	more	part	of	the	crowd,
one	goes	beyond	 the	mob	psychology.	The	only	possibility	 is	of	getting	out	of
the	mind,	moving	deeper	into	s	state	of	no-mind,	into	meditation.
Yes,	great	courage	is	needed.	And	is	significant	that	Jesus	called	Andreas	to	be
his	first	disciple.	That	means	that	courage	is	being	called.	So	prove	yourself	true
to	the	name!
Allen	is	a	beautiful	name.	It	has	three	meanings.	The	most	fundamental	meaning
is	the	harmonious	one.
That's	 the	 whole	 definition	 of	 god,	 existence,	 love,	 meditation.	 All	 that	 is
valuable	has	harmony	 in	 it	 as	 its	very	core.	Without	harmony	 there	 is	no	god.
The	 harmony	 in	 existence	 proves	 that	 something	 keeps	 it	 together,	 something
invisible.	Without	harmony	there	is	no	love.	But	it	is	an	invisible	thread,	nobody
can	see	it.
Everybody	can	feel	it.	Love	makes	one	aware	of	the	fact	that	all	that	is	seen	may
not	 be	 all,	 there	 may	 be	 more	 than	 you	 can	 see.	 Reality	 is	 not	 finished	 with
seeing.	 There	 is	 a	 different	 plane	 of	 feeling	 too	which	 is	 far	 deeper,	 far	more
basic.
Without	harmony	there	is	no	joy;	hence	the	other	two	meanings.	One	is	cheerful;
that	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 the	 harmonious	 being.	 when	 you	 are	 in	 harmony
cheerfulness	radiates	from	you	naturally,	spontaneously.	It	becomes	your	vibe.
And	the	second	meaning	is	handsome,	beautiful.	A	harmonious	person	is	bond	to
be	 cheerful	 and	 bound	 to	 be	 beautiful.	 That	 is	 inevitable,	 because	 there	 is
nothing	more	 beautiful	 than	 cheerfulness,	 there	 is	 nothing	more	 graceful	 than
harmony.
Sannyas	is	nothing	but	an	effort	to	bring	harmony	to	your	being.	The	society	has
divided	 it	 into	many	parts,	 it	 has	 cut	 you	 into	 fragments.	But	 cutting	you	 into
fragments	 it	 destroys	 your	 integrity,	 it	makes	 you	 impotent	 so	 that	 it	 can	 rule
over	you.	That	is	the	basic	political	strategy.	It	has	been	followed	by	society	for
centuries:	cut	every	 individual	 into	segments.	When	he	 is	not	whole	he	cannot
stand	on	his	own,	he	cannot	be	rebellious,	he	cannot	have	any	individuality.	He
is	reduced	to	a	slave.	He	becomes	dependent,	always	fearful.	He	forgets	all	about
freedom,	he	forgets	all	about	 truth,	he	forgets	all	about	himself.	His	whole	 life
becomes	just	a	part	of	the	blind	crowd.	the	politicians	and	the	priests	can	easily
exploit	you	when	you	are	in	fragments.
Integrate	 a	 person	 and	 he	 becomes	 a	 free	 individual,	 nobody	 can	 exploit	 him.
Neither	nation	nor	race,	nor	church	--	nobody	can	dominate	him.	He	starts	living
from	 his	 own	 inner	 centre,	 his	 life	 starts	 functioning	 in	 freedom.	 That's	 what
sannyas	is,	it	is	synonymous	with	freedom.
Sannyas	 needs	 courage.	Courage	 is	 the	most	 fundamental	 quality	 for	 religious
enquiry.	It	is	easy	to	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan.	You	need	not
be	courageous,	in	fact	you	only	need	to	be	a	coward.
But	to	be	religious	you	will	need	courage,	great	courage	--	courage	to	destroy	all
the	prisons	that	we	have	become	accustomed	to	living	in,	courage	to	drop	all	the
beliefs,	because	every	belief	is	a	bondage.
If	 you	 don't	 know	 yet	 you	 believe,	 you	 are	 deceiving	 yourself.	 Belief	 is
irrelevant	from	both	sides:	if	you	don't	know,	belief	is	irrelevant;	if	you	know	it
is	irrelevant.	If	you	don't	know,	how	can	you	believe?	And	if	you	know,	there	is
no	 need	 to	 believe,	 you	 know	 it	 already.	 Belief	 is	 a	 very	 cunning	 device,	 but
because	the	whole	of	humanity	suffers	from	great	cowardice,	priests	have	been
successful	in	exploiting.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 make	 you	 aware	 that	 your	 intrinsic	 nature	 is	 courage.
Express	it,	live	it,	risk	everything	for	it,	and	you	will	not	be	a	loser.	Even	if	life
has	 to	be	 lost,	be	 ready	 to	 lose	 it	 --	you	will	gain	God.	That's	 the	only	way	 to
gain	God.	One	has	to	lose	everything.	God	demands	total	commitment.
Unless	you	disappear	like	a	river	in	the	ocean	you	will	not	become	the	ocean.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Courage	means	only	one	thing	basically.	It	means	trusting	the	unknown	against
the	known,	 trusting	no-mind	against	 the	mind.	The	mind	 is	known.	Ald	 that	 is
known	becomes	your	mind	and	all	that	remains	unknown	is	your	heart.	The	heart
never	becomes	a	known	phenomenon.	It	remains	mysterious,	 it	 remains	vague.
You	cannot	define	it,	it	remains	definable.
The	mind	 is	definable.	The	mind	consists	of	 the	past	 and	 the	memories	of	 the
past.	It	is	like	dust	gathering	on	a	mirror.	If	you	want	to	use	the	mirror	you	have
to	 remove	 the	 dust.	 But	 the	 dust	 seems	 to	 be	 very	 valuable,	 it	 seems	 golden,
because	it	is	your	experience,	your	knowledge,	all	that	you	have	learned.
Courage	means	going	beyond	that	which	you	know.	Courage	means	to	be	a	child
again	 and	 again,	 to	 be	 innocent	 again	 and	 again,	 to	 cross	 the	 boundary	 of
knowledge	--	which	is	a	safe	place	to	be	because	you	know	it,	you	are	familiar
with	it.	Always	dying	to	the	past,	every	moment	dying	to	the	past	and	being	born
into	the	new,	into	the	present	--	that	is	courage.
Buddha	says;	When	a	man	becomes	a	sannyasin,	that	is	a	lion's	roar.	He	means
exactly	what	I	am	saying,	It	is	a	quantum	leap,	a	jump	from	the	familiar	into	the
unfamiliar.	Get	ready	for	it!
Sannyas	is	only	a	device	to	push	you	beyond	the	boundaries,	beyond	that	which
you	have	always	believed	to	be	safe:	It	is	pushing	you	into	the	insecure,	because
life	 is	 insecurity.	 Death	 is	 secure,	 safe;	 life	 by	 its	 very	 nature,	 is	 intrinsically
insecure.
So	only	those	who	are	courageous	enough	can	know	life.	Others	only	vegetate,
they	don't	live.
Courage	can	be	of	two	types.	The	first	type	is	the	most	prevalent	one.	The	first
type	is	cultivated.	You	repress	your	fear	and	you	go	on	repressing	your	fear,	so
much	 so	 that	 it	 disappears	 from	your	 consciousness	 and	becomes	part	 of	 your
unconscious.	You	are	no	more	aware	of	it	and	you	start	thinking	that	there	is	no
fear	in	you.
In	ordinary	 situations	 it	will	work,	 but	 in	 any	 extraordinary	 situation	 in	which
real	courage	is	needed	you	will	have	a	breakdown.	The	fear	will	surface	again.	It
was	only	on	the	surface	that	you	were	courageous.	It	had	not	become	your	soul.
The	 second	 type,	 the	 second	 category	 of	 courage	 is	 spontaneous,	 natural,
uncultivated.	 It	 does	 not	 come	 by	 repressing	 fear.	 It	 comes	 by	 understanding
fear,	by	seeing	deeply	into	your	fear.	And	the	moment	you	start	looking	into	fear,
the	fear	starts	evaporating	because	suddenly	you	become	aware	that	you	are	not
it.	It	is	just	an	idea	in	the	mind	and	you	are	the	witness	of	it.	One	thing	becomes
absolutely	certain,	that	you	are	beyond	it,	that	it	does	not	constitute	you	or	your
being.	In	that	very	moment	courage	springs	up,	wells	up.
And	that	is	a	totally	different	thing.	In	no	situation	will	it	leave	you.	Even	death
cannot	destroy	it.
I	 teach	 the	 second	 type	 of	 courage.	 The	 first	 type	 is	 needed	 by	 all	 kinds	 of
soldiers	all	around	the	world.
The	 second	 type	 is	 needed	 by	 the	 sannyasin.	 The	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live	 an
uncultivated	 life,	 natural,	 spontaneous,	 alert,	 aware,	 but	 absolutely	 non-
repressive.	Neither	fear	has	to	be	repressed	nor	greed,	nor	sex
--	nothing	has	to	be	repressed.	Everything	has	to	be	understood.	And	the	miracle
is	 that	 through	 understanding	 comes	 transcendence,	 through	 understanding
comes	transformation.
Sannyas	is	a	death	and	a	birth:	 the	death	of	 the	old,	of	 the	past,	of	all	 that	you
have	been	up	to	now,	and	the	beginning	of	something	absolutely	new.	Sannyas
means	 that	 you	 are	 becoming	 discontinuous	 from	 your	 own	 past,	 you	 are
dropping	 the	 old	 identity,	 you	 are	 entering	 into	 an	 uncharted	 territory	with	 no
map.
The	master	can	only	give	you	hints.	Maps	are	not	possible	because	the	territory
is	constantly	changing.
By	the	time	a	map	is	made	it	is	already	out	of	date;	hence	all	the	scriptures	are
out	of	date.	No	map	can	ever	be	in	tune	with	reality,	because	to	make	a	map	of
the	 unknown	 takes	 time.	 In	 the	 first	 place	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to	 bring	 the
unknown	into	the	language	of	the	known.
It	is	as	if	you	reach	an	island	where	people	have	never	seen	any	flowers	and	you
want	 to	 convey	 to	 them	 the	 beauty	 of	 roses,	marigolds,	 lotuses.	How	 are	 you
going	 to	 convey	 it?	 Whatsoever	 you	 do	 will	 not	 be	 enough,	 they	 will	 not
understand.	 You	 will	 have	 to	 find	 a	 few	metaphors.	 For	 example,	 on	 the	 sea
beach	of	the	island	there	may	be	coloured	stones.	You	can	show	those	coloured
stones	 and	 you	 can	 say	 "The	 flowers	 have	 such	 colours,"	 but	 you	 will	 be
misunderstood	because	those	people	will	think	that	flowers	are	like	stones.
It	 is	next	to	impossible	to	convey	accurately.	That	is	the	first	difficulty,	how	to
make	a	map	of	the	unknown.
The	 second	 difficulty	 is	 that	 if	 you	 try	 and	 you	 succeed	 somehow	 in	making
something	approximate,	by	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	time	it	is	ready	the	territory	has	changed,	it	will	not	fit	it,	and	the	people	who
follow	 that	map	will	 never	 reach.	But	 they	will	worship	 the	map.	That's	what
people	are	doing,	worshipping	the	Bible,	the	Vedas,	the	Gita,	the	Koran.	These
are	all	old	maps.	They	are	beautiful	efforts,	the	people	who	made	those	maps	did
it	out	of	great	compassion	and	love,	but	humanity	only	worships	them.
And	remember,	 the	map	is	not	 the	 territory.	You	can	hang	the	map	of	India	on
your	wall	--	it	is	not	India.	On	the	map	everything	is	shown,	the	Himalayas,	the
Ganges...	but	seeing	the	Himalayas	on	the	map	is	one	thing,	you	are	not	seeing
the	Himalayas	at	all.	To	go	to	the	Himalayas	and	to	see	the	Himalayas	is	totally
different.
The	 master	 can	 only	 give	 you	 hints,	 not	 even	 guidelines,	 just	 hints,	 subtle
indications,	 fingers	 pointing	 to	 the	 moon.	 But	 the	 moon	 is	 rushing,	 changing
every	moment,	so	only	a	master	who	is	still	alive	in	the	body	can	be	of	any	help,
because	he	can	go	on	changing	his	finger	as	the	moon	changes.	Once	the	master
is	dead	you	make	a	statue	of	him;	now	the	finger	is	still	pointing	somewhere	but
it	is	a	stone	finger.	One	thing	is	certain,	it	is	not	pointing	towards	the	moon	at	all.
Once	 Jesus	 is	 gone	 Christianity	 is	 of	 no	 use.	 While	 he	 is	 alive	 it	 its	 of
tremendous	value.	Once	Buddha	 is	gone	Buddhism	is	 futile.	But	people	are	so
stupid.	For	centuries	they	go	on	talking	about	Buddhism	and	Christianity	arguing
for	and	against.
Sannyas	means	 to	be	with	a	 living	master.	 It	needs	guts	because	 it	 is	going	 to
change	you.	It	is	not	child's	play.	It	is	risky,	it	is	not	a	game.	But	I	can	trust	you	-
-	I	always	trust	Germans.	(laughter)	I	love	Germans!	they	have	guts.	They	can	do
some	things	which	others	hesitate	to	do.
Sannyas	is	the	process	of	always	remaining	new,	never	gathering	the	old,	never
accumulating,	never	accumulating	 the	past.	We	go	on	accumulating	memories.
The	more	memories	we	have,	the	older	we	are.
Consciousness	becomes	burdened	with	memories.	Then	we	go	on	dragging.	We
lose	 the	 lightness	 of	 childhood,	 the	 innocence	 of	 childhood,	 the	 beauty	 of
childhood.
The	child	is	beautiful	for	the	simple	reason	that	he	has	no	past,	no	burden;	hence
he	is	so	light,	he	is	not	heavy.	And	because	he	has	no	past	he	has	no	knowledge	-
-	 past	 becomes	 knowledge	 --	 hence	 he	 is	 always	 full	 of	 wonder.	 Knowledge
prevents	wondering.	It	makes	you	feel	that	you	already	know	--	what	is	there	to
wonder	 about?	 The	 child	 never	 feels	 that	 he	 knows;	 hence	 he	 is	 always
questioning,	enquiring.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	to	be	child	again	but	on	a	higher	plane,	in	a	different
way,	 not	 physically,	 but	 psychologically.	 and	 the	 way	 to	 be	 a	 child	 again
psychologically	 is	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 past,	 to	 disconnect	 from	 the	 past.	 Each
moment	die	to	the	past	so	that	you	can	be	born	anew.
Be	new.	Don't	gather	any	dust	on	the	mirror	of	your	consciousness	and	you	will
be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 which	 is.	 God	 is	 another	 name	 for	 that	 which	 is.	 God	 is
available	to	those	who	are	mirrorlike,	clean,	without	any	dust.	And	we	have	so
much	that	the	mirrors	have	been	completely	lost.	We	don't	remember	where	we
have	put	them.	There	is	dust	and	dust,	layer	upon	layer.
Meditation	is	discovering	your	 lost	mirror.	It	 is	digging	deep	into	 the	mud	that
you	have	accumulated	around	yourself	in	the	hope	that	it	is	gold.	It	is	nothing,	it
is	simply	mud.	All	memories	are	worthless.	And	when	I	say	that	I	don't	mean	to
forget	your	phone	number	(laughter)...	or	to	forget	who	your	husband	is	and	who
your	child	is	and	who	is	who.	I	don't	mean	that.	I	don't	mean	the	ordinary,	factual
memories,	I	mean	the	psychological	garbage.
Somebody	insulted	you	twenty	years	before	and	the	memory	is	still	there;	when
you	see	the	person	it	is	revived	again.	I	mean	that	kind	of	memory.	You	cannot
see	 the	 person:	 that	 memory	 comes	 up	 and	 covers	 your	 mirror,	 you	 become
enraged.	He	may	have	changed,	everything	is	changing;	he	may	no	longer	be	an
enemy	 to	 you.	But	 because	 twenty	 years	 back	 he	 insulted..and	 nobody	 knows
whether	he	insulted	you	or	not,	that	may	have	been	just	your	idea.	You	may	have
felt	 hurt,	 he	may	not	 have	meant	 it	 at	 all.	He	may	not	 even	 remember,	 he	not
even	be	aware	 that	he	has	done	any	wrong	to	you.	But	you	go	on	carrying	the
wound.	Whenever	you	see	the	person	the	wound	starts	hurting	and	again	there	is
a	cloud	around	you	and	you	cannot	see	 the	person	as	he	 is.	You	see	him	as	he
was	 twenty	 years	 before.	 He	may	 not	 have	 been	 like	 that	 but	 a	 least	 in	 your
memory	you	carry	that	picture.
Psychological	memory	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	 Factual	memory	 is	 okay,	 it	 is	 not	 a
problem,	it	does	not	create	any	dust.	If	one	can	drop	the	psychological	memory
and	can	be	new	every	moment,	every	day,	then	life	becomes	a	joy.	It	becomes	an
incredible	experience.	Each	moment	brings	new	surprises.	Each	moment	flowers
go	on	showering	on	you	from	the	beyond.
Sannyas	is	a	sunrise;	hence	the	orange	colour.	It	 is	 the	colour	of	the	sky	in	the
East	just	before	the	sun	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
rises.	It	 is	 the	colour	of	 the	dawn,	 the	night	 is	over	and	the	new	day	beings.	A
new	chapter	opens.
Sannyasin	is	not	a	continuity	with	your	past,	it	is	discontinuous.	Put	a	full	stop
on	your	past	and	start	from	ABC,	fresh.	Be	a	child	again.	Unlearn	all	the	tricks
that	 you	 have	 learned	 before.	 They	 are	 nothing	 but	 tricks,	 tricks	 to	 avoid	 the
truth,	 tricks	 to	 escape	 from	 reality,	 tricks	 to	 deceive	 others	 and	 to	 deceive
oneself.
Unlearn	all	that.
From	this	moment	die	to	the	past	and	be	reborn.	A	new	life	begins,	and	it	has	to
begin	 from	 the	 very	 beginning.	Don't	 carry	 the	 past	 as	 a	 load	 hanging	 around
your	 neck	 like	 a	 rock;	 drop	 it.	And	 don't	 try	 to	 drop	 it	 piece	 by	 piece;	 that	 is
unnecessary	postponement.	Drop	the	whole	lot	in	a	single	blow.	That	is	courage.
There	are	people	who	drop	it	but	chunk	by	chunk.	They	take	so	long	a	time	that
the	 whole	 thing	 becomes	 tedious,	 wearisome,	 boring.	 They	 miss	 the	 joy	 of
becoming	free	in	a	single	moment.
Initiation	simply	means	that	you	are	ready	to	cut	off	from	the	past	in	one	blow.
don't	look	back.	And	the	moment	you	are	not	more	concerned	with	the	past,	the
future	disappears	of	its	own	accord	because	the	future	is	nothing	but	a	projection
of	the	past.	It	is	nothing	but	the	desire	to	live	the	past	again	and	again...	of	course
in	a	 little	modified	way,	a	 little	richer,	a	 little	better.	 it	 is	dropping	all	 that	was
miserable	in	the	past	and	choosing	all	that	was	pleasurable.	That's	what	future	is.
When	the	past	is	dropped	the	future	disappears,	and	only	present	is	left.
To	 be	 present	 in	 the	 present	 creates	 meditative	 energy.	 To	 be	 present	 to	 the
present	is	the	very	essence	of	meditation	and	the	very	foundation	of	sannyas.
The	past	 is	 the	only	problem.	We	are	confined	by	our	past.	 it	hangs	around	us,
around	 our	 neck	 like	 a	 rock.	 It	 keeps	 us	 tethered	 to	 that	which	 is	 no	more.	 It
keeps	us	confined	to	the	dead,	it	does	not	allow	us	to	move	into	life.
Life	 is	 always	 present.	 It	 is	 never	 past,	 it	 is	 never	 future	 either,	 it	 is	 always
herenow.	And	we	are	living	in	the	past,	which	is	no	more,	or	sometimes	in	the
future,	which	is	not	yet.	Both	are	non-existential.	That's	why	we	don't	 taste	the
joy	 of	 being	 alive.	We	 go	 on	 chewing	 stones.	We	 cannot	 get	 any	 juice	 out	 of
them.
The	past	is	like	a	stone,	something	utterly	dead,	it	cannot	nourish	you.	And	so	is
the	future.	It	is	not	yet	born,	it	is	just	in	your	imagination	and	you	cannot	live	on
imaginary	 food.	Only	 the	 present	 gives	 nourishment	 to	 the	 soul,	 it	makes	 you
more	and	more	alive.
So	 the	whole	process	of	sannyas	 is	dropping	 the	past,	dropping	 the	future,	and
getting	more	and	more	attuned	to	the	present	moment.
Sannyas	 is	 a	marriage:	marriage	 to	 the	 divine,	marriage	 to	 the	whole,	 the	 part
deciding	 to	 disappear	 in	 the	 whole.	 It	 is	 a	 love	 affair.	 And	 it	 asks	 for	 much,
because	it	asks	for	your	totality.	Less	than	that	won't	do.
You	cannot	be	partially	related	to	god,	remember.	Either	you	are	totally	unrelated
or	you	are	totally	related;	there	is	no	in-between.	God	does	not	believe	in	half-
hearted	measures.
Sannyas	has	to	become	a	total	commitment,	a	total	involvement	--	only	then	can
life	go	through	a	radical	change.	Small	efforts	can	at	the	most	renovate	the	old
house,	patch	up	things	here	and	there.	But	the	old,	the	rotten	remains	the	same,	it
can't	become	new.
Sannyas	means	demolishing	the	whole	structure,	clearing	the	ground	completely
so	that	a	new	temple	can	be	built.	Sannyas	is	very	destructive	in	the	beginning
and	 very	 creative	 in	 the	 end.	 The	 destructive	 part	 is	 very	 essential.	 It	 has	 to
destroy	your	ego,	it	has	to	destroy	your	mind,	it	has	to	destroy	your	ideologies,
belief	systems	--	Christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,	communism.	It	has
to	destroy	all	that	you	have	been	up	to	now.	It	has	to	shatter	the	whole	identity,	it
has	to	create	an	identity	crisis.	Only	then	can	you	move	into	the	new	--	when	you
are	completely	free	from	the	old.
To	be	 free	 from	 the	old	 is	 the	beginning	of	 the	new.	And	 then	one	can	create.
One	can	really	be	creative	and	a	multi-dimensional	creativity	can	explode.	Then
life	is	a	joy,	then	life	is	a	splendor.	Then	life	is	a	celebration.
Wisdom	is	not	information,	it	is	a	light.	It	is	not	knowledge,	it	is	knowing.	It	is
the	 capacity	 to	 see	 clearly,	 it	 is	 clarity.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 mirror,	 absolutely	 clean,
without	any	dust,	so	that	it	can	reflect	that	which	is.
Knowledge	accumulates	theories,	philosophies,	ideologies	--	and	all	those	things
are	nothing	but	layers	of	dust	on	the	mirror.	To	be	wise	one	needs	to	clean	the
mirror	completely.
Everyone	 is	 born	 with	 a	 small	 flame	 of	 wisdom	 inside,	 but	 that	 flame	 is
surrounded	by	so	much	smoke	of	knowledge,	information,	memory,	experience,
that	we	don't	feel	it,	we	don't	see	it.	All	this	smoke	has	to	be	dispersed.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
That's	 exactly	 the	 process	 of	 sannyas:	 making	 you	 utterly	 nude,	 making	 your
heart	absolutely	exposed	to	the	wind,	to	the	rain,	to	the	sun.	And	then	you	start
reflecting	that	which	is.
God	is	another	name	for	that	which	is	--	or	truth,	or	enlightenment,	they	all	mean
the	same	thing.
Life	is	a	god-given	opportunity.	We	have	not	earned	it.	He	gives	it	not	because
we	 are	worthy	but	 because	 he	 has	 too	much	 and	he	 has	 to	 give	 it.	 It	 is	 like	 a
cloud	full	of	rainwater,	so	full	that	it	has	to	rain,	it	has	to	shower	somewhere;	it
may	 even	 be	 on	 the	 rocks,	 but	 it	 has	 to	 shower.	 It	 is	 like	 a	 flower	 that	 has	 to
release	its	fragrance.	god	means	abundance.	He	is	so	much	that	he	has	to	share
his	being	in	infinite	ways.
Always	remember	that	you	are	a	gift	of	god.	Respect	it	use	the	opportunity.	don't
waste	it.
Millions	 of	 people	 go	 on	 wasting	 such	 precious	 time	 --	 each	 moment	 can
become	tremendous	joy.	They	go	on	wasting	it	in	unnecessary	worries,	anxieties,
miseries.
Becoming	 a	 sannyasin	means	 that	 now	 you	will	 remain	 alert	 that	 no	 time,	 no
energy	is	wasted	in	the	non-essential,	that	you	are	going	to	make	something	out
of	this	god-given	opportunity,	that	you	are	going	to	grow,	that	you	are	going	to
mature,	that	you	are	going	to	realise	who	you	are.
Sannyas	is	a	process	of	self-actualisation.
The	seeker	of	truth	is	religious.	The	seeker	of	good	is	moral.	And	the	seeker	of
beauty	 is	 the	 poet,	 the	 musician,	 the	 artist.	 But	 my	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 a
synthesis;	 he	 has	 to	 be	 all	 three	 together.	 If	 you	 are	 one	 then	 something	 is
missing.	Then	you	are	one-dimensional;	then	you	will	not	have	depth,	you	will
be	flat.
That's	 why	 religious	 people	 are	 so	 flat.	 They	 don't	 have	 depth,	 they	 are	 one-
dimensional	 people.	 And	 moral	 people	 are	 also	 very	 flat.	 To	 have	 depth	 one
needs	three	dimensions.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 a	 new	kind	 of	man,	 a	 three-dimensional	man.	And
when	you	are	 three-dimensional	a	miracle	happens:	 the	fourth	arises	out	of	 the
synthesis	of	the	three.	And	the	fourth	is	the	centre	of	all	the	three.	all	three	are
three	expressions	of	the	fourth.	The	fourth	is	really	god,	nirvana,	absolute	truth.
In	the	East	we	have	simply	called	it	the	fourth	--	turiya.	We	have	not	given	it	any
name.	To	 three	we	 give	 names	 because	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 express	 them	 through
words.	The	fourth	we	simply	call	the	fourth.
Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 call	 his	 way	 the	 fourth	 way....	 He	 could	 not	 develop	 it	 and
could	not	systematise	it.
The	situation	was	not	 ripe	and	he	was	working	against	hazards.	The	West	was
absolutely	 unacquainted	with	 the	 idea	 of	 the	 fourth.	 The	West	 can	 understand
three	dimensions	 --	 at	 least	 intellectually	 --	 bu	 the	 fourth	 is	 absolutely	beyond
the	Western	mind.
Gurdjieff	tried	hard	but	could	not	manage	it.	First	he	was	working	in	the	West:
no	right	space,	no	right	soil,	no	right	people	available.	Hence	he	was	working	in
the	right	direction	but	could	not	complete	the	work.
He	died	without	completing	something	tremendous	that	he	had	started.
I	have	particularly	chosen	not	to	go	to	the	West	but	to	call	the	West	to	the	East.
Now	something	strange	has	 to	be	managed.	 I	 am	avoiding	 Indians	as	much	as
possible.	 I	 am	 debarring	 them	 as	 much	 as	 possible	 because	 they	 think	 they
already	know	--	that	is	their	trouble.	They	know	nothing,	they	have	lost	all	track,
but	they	know	words	--	and	I	don't	want	to	waste	my	time	with	verbal	people.
The	West	can	understand	because	it	has	not	egoism	of	knowing.	But	it	has	not
background,	so	I	have	chosen	to	be	in	the	East	so	that	the	East	can	function	as	a
backdrop.	I	am	working	in	the	West,	remaining	in	the	East,	calling	forth	the	West
here	so	that	this	combination	becomes	possible:	the	eastern	background	with	the
western	openness.	And	my	feeling	is	that	I	am	not	going	to	fail	where	Gurfjieff
failed.	Things	have	started	happening.	We	will	be	able	to	create	the	fourth	way,
and	 that	 will	 become	 the	 source	 of	 a	 new	 humanity.	 Something	 immensely
valuable	 is	 transpiring.	All	of	you	becoming	sannyasins	 is	not	 just	an	ordinary
phenomenon.	 But	 only	 later	 on	 will	 people	 become	 aware,	 people	 always
become	aware	only	later	on.	Even	you	who	are	participating	in	this	great	work
are	not	clearly	alert	and	aware	of	what	is	happening.
But	 something	 is	pulling	you	and	you	are	becoming	participants,	 not	knowing
that	 you	 are	 participating	 in	 something	 tremendously	 vast	 and	 tremendously
significant	for	the	whole	future	of	humanity.
God	is	our	victory,	 in	god	is	our	victory.	Without	god	we	are	failures.	We	may
have	all	the	possessions	and	the	wealth	of	the	world,	we	may	be	great	kings	and
queens	and	emperors,	but	still	we	are	failures.
Without	god	nobody	is	ever	a	success.	It	can't	happen	in	the	nature	of	things.	It	is
only	with	god	that	victory	is	possible.
When	you	become	one	with	god,	when	you	exist	in	harmony	with	god,	your	life
has	the	taste	of	victory.
You	may	 not	 have	 anything,	 you	may	 not	 have	much	money	 --	 that	 does	 not
matter:	you	will	sit	 like	a	king	and	you	will	walk	like	a	king	and	you	will	 live
like	a	king.	You	will	be	a	god,	a	goddess.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 moment	 that	 one	 becomes	 harmonious	 with	 god	 one	 has	 become	 a	 god.
Jesus	 says:	 I	 and	my	 father	 in	 heaven	 are	 one.	He	 is	 crucified	because	 of	 this
great	statement.	The	small	minds	cannot	tolerate	it;	it	looks	sacrilegious	to	claim
"I	am	god."	But	what	can	Jesus	do?	What	can	poor	Jesus	do?	The	moment	that
you	are	in	harmony	with	god	you	are	god.	If	Jesus	says	anything	else	it	will	be
lying.
Mansoor	Al	Hillaj	declares	"Ana'l	Haq"	--	I	am	the	truth	--	and	he	is	killed	for
that.	 Truth	 has	 suffered	 so	 much	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 people	 are	 so
mediocre,	 so	mean	 that	 they	can	only	understand	 lies.	They	cannot	 rise	a	 little
higher	to	see	the	truth.
Before	one	can	understand	truth	one	needs	to	go	through	a	radical	change,	one
needs	a	new	vision.	But	this	much	is	an	absolute	certainty,	that	with	god	we	are
victorious	 because	 we	 become	 gods.	 Without	 god	 we	 are	 failures,	 because
without	 god	 we	 are	 very	 tiny,	 very	 small,	 struggling	 against	 such	 a	 huge
universe.
Our	failure	is	absolutely	certain,	it	is	inevitable.
Sannyas	means	deciding:	"Now	I	will	not	try	to	remain	separate,	aloof,	I	will	not
try	 to	be	an	 island.	 I	will	dissolve,	melt	and	merge	 into	 the	ocean	and	become
one	with	it."
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	The	Individual	and	the	Whole
2	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002025
ShortTitle:	WITHME02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	universe	is	always	leading	you,	guiding	you	towards	the	ultimate	expression
of	your	being,	the	ultimate	flowering	of	your	being.
If	you	can	surrender	to	existence,	if	you	can	allow	yourself	to	be	overwhelmed
by	 it,	 then	 the	 transformation	 happens	 so	 easily,	 without	 any	 bloodshed	 and
without	 any	damage.	One	changes	 so	 silently,	 so	noiselessly,	 as	 if	 nothing	has
happened.
On	 the	 outside	 everything	 remains	 the	 same,	 and	 on	 the	 inside	 nothing	 is	 the
same.
Sufis	 have	 one	 hundred	 names	 for	 God.	 Ninety-nine	 are	 utterable,	 one,	 the
hundredth,	is	silent;	it	cannot	be	spoken.	In	India	we	have	one	thousand	names
for	God.	We	have	a	whole	scripture,	VISHNU
SHASTRANAM,	 one	 thousand	 names	 of	God,	 devoted	 only	 to	 the	 names.	 In
that	 scripture	 nothing	 else	 is	 written,	 just	 the	 names.	 But	 each	 name	 has	 its
beauty	and	each	name	denotes	something	about	God,	some	aspect.
Hari	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	of	all	those	one	thousand	names.	My	choice,	if	I
have	 to	choose	one	out	of	 that	one	 thousand,	will	be	Hari	because	Hari	means
the	thief.	God	steals	the	heart,	hence	he	is	called	the	thief,	the	greatest	thief,	the
master	thief.	He	does	not	steal	small	things	from	you,	he	steals	your	very	heart,
he	 steals	 your	 very	 being.	 He	 leaves	 nothing	 behind,	 he	 absorbs	 you	 totally.
That's	what	actually	happens,	it	is	not	only	a	name.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	one	moves	closer	to	God,	slowly	slowly	one	disappears,	not	even	a	trace
is	 left	 behind...	 because	God	means	 the	whole,	 the	 vast	 existence.	We	 are	 just
dewdrops	and	the	whole	is	like	an	infinite	ocean.
When	the	dewdrop	comes	closer	to	the	ocean	it	is	bound	to	disappear.	But	that
disappearance	is	not	a	loss,	it	is	a	gain,	because	certainly	the	dewdrop	disappears
as	a	dewdrop,	but	it	becomes	the	ocean.	It	is	a	death	and	a	resurrection.
One	dies	as	an	individual	and	then	one	is	born	as	the	universal.	One	dies	as	Jesus
and	is	born	as	Christ.
We	are	suffering	from	separation,	separation	from	God.	And	unless	we	become
one	with	God	again	the	suffering	cannot	disappear.	Bliss	is	not	possible	in	a	state
of	separation.	Bliss	happens	only	when	you	merge	and	meet	and	disappear	into
the	whole.	It	is	good	to	long,	to	be	thirsty	for	the	reunion.
That's	what	sannyas	is:	a	thirst	for	reunion	with	God,	a	tremendous	longing	to	be
one	with	the	whole	again.
God	is	always	ready	to	come	in,	but	we	are	not	ready	to	welcome	him.	In	fact	it
is	not	we	who	are	searching	for	him,	but	he	who	is	searching	for	us.	But	we	are
so	non-receptive,	so	deaf,	so	unfeeling,	so	insensitive,	that	we	can't	see,	we	can't
hear	--	and	he	is	surrounding	us	in	every	possible	way.	He	comes	to	you	in	the
sunrays,	 he	 comes	 in	 the	 songs	 of	 the	 birds,	 he	 comes	 in	 the	 colours	 of	 a
rainbow,	he	comes	in	the	air	that	you	breathe.	He	comes	in	a	thousand	and	one
ways,	 but	 we	 cannot	 recognise	 him	 because	 we	 have	 not	 yet	 learned	 how	 to
welcome	the	ultimate	guest.
Sannyas	teaches	you	only	one	thing:	how	to	be	a	host,	how	to	open	your	doors
and	pray	for	God	to	come	in,	how	to	empty	your	heart	so	 that	 there	 is	enough
space	for	the	guest	to	be	inside	you,	how	to	become	a	womb	so	that	God	can	be
part	of	your	being.	And	the	moment	you	allow	God	in,	you	disappear.	Then	only
God	 is.	Then	you	 speak,	 but	 in	 fact	 he	 speaks;	 then	you	 create,	 but	 in	 fact	 he
creates.	You	become	only	a	vehicle.	And	the	great	ecstasy	of	being	a	vehicle	of
God	is	inexpressible.	One	knows	it	only	by	experiencing	it.
Man	 has	 to	 be	 absolutely	 empty,	 only	 then	 is	 the	 space	 created	 for	 God	 to
descend	in	him.	And	we	are	so	full	of	rubbish,	so	full	of	junk;	even	if	God	wants
to	enter	he	will	not	find	any	place	inside.	There	is	no	place	inside.	Our	cups	are
full.	Not	even	a	single	drop	can	be	contained	any	more.	We	have	to	empty	the
cup	completely.
This	 is	 the	whole	process	of	sannyas:	emptying	yourself	of	yourself,	emptying
yourself	of	all	thoughts,	desires,	memories,	hopes,	expectations	--	just	a	process
of	emptying.
The	moment	 you	 are	 absolutely	 empty	 and	you	don't	 see	 anything	 inside	you,
suddenly	all	becomes	light.	Suddenly	thousands	of	flowers	open	in	your	being.
You	become	full	of	fragrance	and	music,	a	music	that	has	not	been	heard	before,
a	 fragrance	 that	 is	 not	 of	 the	 earth.	 And	 you	 are	 liberated	 in	 that	 experience,
liberated	from	life,	liberated	from	death,	liberated	from	time	itself.	You	become
part	of	the	eternal	flow	of	existence.
That	 is	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 of	 sannyas:	 to	 become	 part	 of	 the	 eternal	 flower,	 to
become	part	of	tao,	of	dhamma,	of	the	universe,	of	God	or	whatsoever	name	one
wants	to	choose.	But	one	has	to	disappear	totally	for	God	to	be.
God	is	our	victory,	in	God	is	our	victory.	Without	God	we	are	failures.	We	may
have	all	the	possessions	and	the	wealth	of	the	world,	we	may	be	great	kings	and
queens	and	emperors,	but	still	we	are	failures.
Without	God	nobody	is	ever	a	success.	It	can't	happen	in	the	nature	of	things.	It
is	only	with	God	that	victory	is	possible.
When	you	become	one	with	God,	when	you	exist	in	harmony	with	God,	your	life
has	 the	 taste	 of	 victory.	You	may	 not	 have	 anything,	 you	may	 not	 have	much
money	--	that	does	not	matter:	you	will	sit	like	a	king	and	you	will	walk	like	a
king	and	you	will	live	like	a	king.	You	will	be	a	god,	a	goddess.
The	moment	 that	 one	 becomes	 harmonious	with	God	 one	 has	 become	 a	 god.
Jesus	 says:	 I	 and	my	 father	 in	 heaven	 are	 one.	He	 is	 crucified	because	 of	 this
great	statement.	The	small	minds	cannot	tolerate	it;	it	looks	sacrilegious	to	claim
"I	am	God."	But	what	can	Jesus	do?	What	can	poor	Jesus	do?	The	moment	that
you	are	in	harmony	with	God	are	you	God.	If	Jesus	says	anything	else	he	will	be
lying.
Mansoor	Al	Hillaj	declares	"Ana'l	Haq"	--	I	am	the	truth	--	and	he	is	killed	for
that.	 Truth	 has	 suffered	 so	 much	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 people	 are	 so
mediocre,	 so	mean	 that	 they	can	only	understand	 lies.	They	cannot	 rise	a	 little
higher	to	see	the	truth.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Before	one	can	understand	truth	one	needs	to	go	through	a	radical	change,	one
needs	 a	 new	vision.	But	 this	much	 is	 absolute	 certainty,	 that	with	God	we	 are
victorious	 because	 we	 become	 gods.	 Without	 God	 we	 are	 failures,	 because
without	 God	 we	 are	 very	 tiny,	 very	 small,	 struggling	 against	 such	 a	 huge
universe.	Our	failure	is	absolutely	certain,	it	is	inevitable.
Sannyas	means	deciding:	"Now	I	will	get	more	and	more	in	tune	with	the	whole.
I	 will	 not	 try	 to	 remain	 separate,	 aloof,	 I	 will	 not	 try	 to	 be	 an	 island.	 I	 will
dissolve,	melt	and	merge	into	the	ocean	and	become	one	with	it"
Existence	 is	 like	 an	ocean	 and	we	 are	waves	 dancing	 in	 the	 sun,	 disappearing
again	and	again	and	appearing	again	and	again.	There	is	no	birth,	no	death	--	we
are	eternal.
Only	superficially	does	it	appear	that	a	wave	is	born	and	then	dies,	but	it	is	only
superficial,	 because	 it	 always	 remains	 the	 same.	 Sometimes	 it	 is	 manifest,
sometimes	 unmanifest,	 sometimes	 it	 is	 rising	 towards	 the	 sun	 with	 a	 deep
longing	to	touch	the	sky,	to	reach	the	stars,	and	the	next	moment,	it	is	relaxing
deep	into	the	ocean,	resting.	Death	is	rest.	And	when	rest	is	over	the	wave	rises
again.	 It	 is	 eternal	 recurrence,	 we	 go	 on	 coming	 again	 and	 again	 and	 again.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 afraid	 of	 death,	 because	 death	 is	 false.	 The	most	 false
thing	in	existence	is	death.	And	if	death	is	false,	naturally,	birth	is	false	too.	We
existed	before	birth	and	we	will	exist	after	death.
Once	 you	 start	 feeling	 this,	 not	 believing	 but	 experiencing	 this,	 all	 fear
disappears.	And	the	energy	that	is	involved	in	fear	is	released	and	becomes	love.
It	is	the	same	energy	that	becomes	fear.	Once	fear	is	no	more	there	tremendous
energy	is	released,	and	that	energy	becomes	love.	It	starts	radiating	through	you,
reaching	to	other	people.	You	start	overflowing	with	love.
Sannyas	is	an	effort	to	know	oneself	as	a	wave	of	the	ocean	that	God	is.
Tanmaya	means	one	who	is	utterly	dissolved,	utterly	 lost.	 It	 is	a	space	without
ego.	One	 is,	but	one	has	no	 idea	of	 the	 I.	 It	happens	sometimes	 in	 listening	 to
music:	 you	are,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 sense	of	 I,	 you	are	 just	 an	open	 space.	That	 is
tanmaya.	That	 space	 is	needed	 for	a	 sannyasin,	because	only	 in	 that	 space	can
God	be	contacted.	If	you	are	then	God	is	not,	if	you	are	not	then	God	is.
So	 learn	how	to	disappear,	how	to	evaporate.	Learn	how	not	 to	be.	That	 is	 the
greatest	art	 in	 life	because	 the	ego	 is	 so	cunning.	 It	 always	 finds	 some	way	 to
come	in	from	the	back	door.	It	can	become	humble,	it	can	become	pious,	it	can
become	saintly,	it	can	become	holy.	It	can	play	all	kinds	of	games.
A	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 constantly	 alert	 not	 to	 allow	 the	 ego	 to	 play	 any	more
games.
Be	watchful.	And	the	more	you	know	the	ways	of	the	ego,	the	more	you	are	free
of	it,	because	it	cannot	play.	whatsoever	strategy	you	have	come	to	know	upon
you	any	longer.	Slowly	slowly	all	doors	are	closed.
One	day,	when	the	last	strategy	has	collapsed,	you	are	freed	from	yourself.
That	is	liberation.	And	that	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	all	religious	effort.	Only	in	that
liberated	 state	 can	 one	 know	 what	 truth	 is.	 They	 are	 not	 really	 two	 separate
things	but	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	Jesus	says:	Truth	liberates.	We	can	also
say:	Liberation	is	truth.
God	is	always	willing.	He	waits	for	us	to	be	willing.	He	is	ready	to	give	but	we
are	not	ready	to	receive.
He	is	just	standing	at	the	door	but	we	don't	open	the	door.	Even	if	he	knocks	on
the	door	we	don't	listen.	The	blame	is	totally	ours.
His	grace	knows	no	limits,	but	we	are	so	miserly	that	not	only	in	giving	are	we
miserly,	 in	 receiving	 too	 we	 have	 become	 miserly.	 And	 God	 asks	 nothing	 in
return;	still	we	go	on	missing.	It	seems	that	to	receive	hurts	our	ego.
So	the	problem	is	not	on	God's	side	--	God	is	love,	God	is	compassion,	God	is
help.	But	the	problem	is	on	our	side:	how	to	open	up,	how	to	receive	his	gifts,
how	to	be	more	grateful,	thankful	--	because	in	gratefulness	one	becomes	more
open,	in	thankfulness	one	becomes	more	receptive.
The	 whole	 process	 of	 sannyas	 is	 of	 becoming	 feminine	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be
pregnant	with	God.	He	is	ready	to	enter	your	spiritual	womb.	But	we	don't	allow
him,	we	go	on	reflecting	him.	And	the	irony	is	that	on	the	one	hand	we	go	to	the
churches	and	to	the	mosques	and	the	temples	to	pray,	and	on	the	other	hand	we
reject	every	effort	of	God	to	help	us.	We	are	split.	Our	heart	wants	the	help,	our
head	rejects	the	help.
Unless	we	start	rejecting	our	head	we	will	never	be	able	to	receive	the	help,	we
will	go	on	missing	it.
My	whole	teaching	here	is:	Reject	the	head,	it	is	not	worth	anything.	Sooner	or
later	it	is	going	to	fall	into	dust	and	disappears,	so	why	bother	so	much	about	it?
Listen	 to	 the	 heart,	 because	 the	 heart	 is	 eternal.	 Listen	 to	 love	 not	 to	 logic,
because	love	is	deathless	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
love	is	the	door	to	God.
Man's	 power	 is	 ugly.	 It	 is	 violent.	Only	God's	 power	 is	 beautiful	 because	 it	 is
love-power.	Man's	power	means	egolessness.	Be	egoless	 so	 that	God	can	 flow
through	 you.	 Let	 God	 pass	 through	 you	 as	 the	 wind	 passes	 through	 the	 pine
trees.	Don't	hinder	God's	ways.	Give	him	your	 total	acceptance.	Just	become	a
hollow	bamboo	so	that	he	can	change	you	into	a	flute,	a	bamboo	flute,	so	that	he
can	sing	through	you.	And	when	God	sings	through	you	there	is	great	power;	but
it	is	not	yours,	it	is	God's.
It	 is	 glorious,	 it	 has	great	 splendour.	 It	 is	 tremendously	beautiful.	 It	will	make
you	 ecstatic.	 It	 will	 also	 make	 others	 ecstatic;	 whomsoever	 comes	 in	 contact
with	you	will	have	a	little	taste	of	it,	will	feel	it,	will	be	overwhelmed	by	it.	But
you	have	to	disappear	for	it.
Sannyas	 means	 committing	 a	 metaphysical	 suicide,	 allowing	 the	 ego	 to
evaporate.	Then	all	glory	is	God's	and	all	power	is	God's.
One	can	fight	for	oneself	or	one	can	fight	for	God.	To	fight	for	oneself	is	foolish,
to	fight	for	God	is	wise,	because	to	fight	for	oneself	is	bound	to	be	a	failure.	One
cannot	win	 against	 the	whole.	One	 cannot	win	 as	 a	 separate	 entity.	Victory	 is
with	 God	 --	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 without	 him.	Without	 him	 there	 is	 only	 defeat,
failure,	 frustration.	Life	 is	with	God	because	God	 is	 life.	Without	him	 there	 is
only	death.	He	is	our	breath,	he	breathes	in	our	heart.
Once	this	is	understood	one	becomes	a	vehicle	for	God.	Then	one	can	say	with
one's	 totality	 "Thy	 will	 be	 done."	 That's	 what	 I	 mean	 by	 becoming	 a	 divine
warrior:	fighting	for	God's	victory.
First	many	things	within	you	have	to	be	conquered	because	they	go	against	God:
your	anger,	your	greed,	your	jealousy.	Once	you	have	become	full	of	light	inside
you	 have	 to	 help	 others	 to	 fight	 with	 their	 darkness.	 It	 is	 an	 eternal	 struggle
between	the	forces	of	light	and	darkness.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	your	are	being	recruited	for	God.
Man	can	live	in	two	ways:	either	as	an	ego	or	as	an	egolessness.	To	live	as	an
ego	is	to	live	the	ordinary,	mundane	life.	To	live	as	an	egolessness	is	to	live	the
sacred	life,	the	holy	life.	On	the	outside	everything	remains	the	same,	but	at	the
deepest	core	of	your	being	something	radically	changes.
If	you	think	of	yourself	as	separate	from	existence	you	are	bound	to	live	as	an
ego.	 Then	 the	 ego	 creates	 its	 problems.	You	 are	 constantly	 afraid	 because	 the
vast	whole,	 the	vast	universe,	 is	against	you	--	you	are	against	 it.	You	are	 in	a
kind	of	struggle,	and	there	is	no	hope	that	you	can	win.	How	can	a	small	particle
win	against	the	whole	universe?	The	very	idea	is	idiotic.	But	that	is	the	idea	that
we	 are	 carrying;	 hence	 the	 fear	 that	 we	 may	 be	 defeated;	 hence	 the	 constant
trembling,	anxiety,	anguish.
And	we	will	be	defeated	again	and	again;	nobody	can	win	against	the	whole.	So
one's	life	becomes	a	long	series	of	failures	and	ultimately	there	is	death.	Death	is
a	by-product	of	the	ego.	If	you	think	you	are	separate	from	existence,	then	only
is	there	death.	If	you	think	you	are	one	with	existence,	how	can	there	be	death?
The	egoless	person	knows	nothing	of	death,	he	knows	only	eternal	life.
Samarpito	means:	surrender	 the	ego.	If	anything	has	 to	be	surrendered	it	 is	 the
ego.	If	anything	has	to	be	renounced,	it	is	not	the	world,	it	is	the	ego.	Live	in	the
world	but	live	egolessly,	and	then	you	are	a	sannyasin.	And	you	will	be	surprised
that	 as	 the	 ego	 is	 dropped	 all	 anxieties,	 all	 fears	 disappear	 as	 if	 they	 never
existed,	just	as	dreams	disappear	in	the	morning	when	you	wake	up.
This	 is	 real	 awakening.	 Moving	 from	 ego	 to	 egolessness	 is	 the	 most	 radical
change	possible.	There	is	no	other	revolution	greater	than	that	because	it	brings
you	 to	 the	ultimate	peak	of	awareness,	awakening.	 It	makes	you	a	Buddha,	an
awakened	one.
Ramana	Maharshi	 was	 dying,	 and	 somebody	 asked	 "Where	 will	 you	 go	 after
death?"	He	opened	his	eyes	and	he	said:	"Where	can	I	go?	I	have	always	been
here	and	I	will	still	be	here."	He	laughed	at	the	very	question.
We	can't	go	anywhere,	we	are	part	of	the	whole.	There	is	nowhere	to	go.	There	is
no	death,	no	birth,	and	if	there	is	no	death,	no	birth,	where	can	fear	exist,	where
can	anxiety	arise?	We	have	cut	the	very	root	of	all	misery.
Religion	begins	the	moment	you	drop	the	ego.	So	this	is	going	to	be	your	work
here:	drop	the	ego,	forget	that	you	are.	Then	God	is	and	only	God	is.
Buddha	says:	"This	very	body	is	the	lotus	paradise,	this	very	body	the	Buddha."
This	ordinary	body	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	capacity	to	invite	God	into	it.	It	can	become	a	host,	it	can	become	a	home	for
God	--	it	all	depends	on	us.
If	we	prepare	our	mind	and	body,	God	is	immediately	ready	to	come	in.	And	the
moment	God	enters	the	body,	the	dust	is	transformed	into	gold.	Then	the	body	is
no	longer	material,	it	itself	becomes	spiritual.	Even	matter	is	transformed.
Every	man	is	an	empty	country	without	God.
Only	with	God	do	we	become	populated.
Only	with	God	entering	us	do	we	 start	 feeling	 contented,	 fulfilled	 for	 the	 first
time.
All	 that	 is	 great	 always	 descends	 from	 above.	 It	 falls	 over	 you,	 it	 rains	 and
showers	 over	 you.	 It	 is	 a	waterfall.	 It	 does	 not	 grow	 from	 below,	 upwards;	 it
showers	from	upwards,	downwards.
In	India	we	have	the	symbol	of	God	as	a	tree	upside-down:	roots	in	the	sky,	and
branches	and	flowers	towards	the	earth.	And	that's	beautiful,	that's	how	it	is.	The
roots	 of	 truth	 are	 in	 the	 ultimate	 --	 that	 is	 above,	 symbolically	 --	 but	 the
fragrance	 can	 fall	 on	 us,	 the	 flowers	 can	 shower	 on	 us,	 we	 just	 have	 to	 be
receptive.
All	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is	a	deep	receptivity,	a	total	receptivity.
That's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 learning	 to	 be	 surrendered,	 learning	 to	 be
receptive,	learning	how	to	let	the	ego	disappear	so	that	you	are	just	a	pure	space,
empty,	 ready,	 welcoming,	 open,	 so	 that	 God	 can	 fall	 into	 your	 being	 like	 a
fragrance,	a	waterfall	of	fragrance,	a	waterfall	of	joy,	a	waterfall	of	truth.
We	are	not	strangers,	outsiders.	We	are	part	of	existence.	This	is	our	home.	We
are	 not	 here	 accidentally,	 we	 are	 here	 because	 we	 are	 needed.	 We	 are	 here
because	God	wanted	us	to	be	here	in	the	first	place.	It	is	his	will.	Hence	nobody
need	feel	alienated.	That	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	problems	that	humanity
is	facing	today.	All	over	the	world	intelligent	people	are	very	worried,	disturbed,
anxious	--	why	are	we	here?
According	to	science	it	seems	accidental.	And	if	we	are	accidental	then	we	are
useless;	then	whether	we	are	nor	are	not	makes	no	difference.	And	if	it	makes	no
difference	 then	 our	 life	 loses	 all	meaning;	 hence	 all	 over	 the	world	 there	 is	 a
climate	 of	 meaninglessness.	 It	 all	 started	 a	 hundred	 years	 ago	 with	 the
declaration	 by	Nietzsche	 that	 God	 is	 dead.	 He	 became	 the	mouthpiece	 of	 the
whole	contemporary	mind.
If	God	 is	 dead	 then	 life	 is	meaningless	 because	God	 is	 the	 only	 possibility	 of
there	 being	 any	 meaning,	 any	 significance.	 God	 simply	 means	 nothing	 but
meaning.	Life	is	meaningful	--	that's	the	whole	meaning	of	God.
A	 man	 was	 talking	 to	 an	 old	 rabbi	 and	 the	 man	 said:	 "Do	 you	 know	 what
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 says?	He	 says	 'God	 is	 dead'."	The	 old	 rabbi	 looked	 at	 the
man	and	said	"	Do	you	know	what	God	says?	God	says
"Friedrich	Nietzsche	is	dead!'"(laughter)
And	the	old	rabbi	is	far	truer.	God	is	not	dead,	God	is	as	alive	as	ever.	But	the
idea	that	God	is	dead	has	made	us	feel	very	meaningless.
Sannyas	means	creating	meaning	in	your	life	again,	bringing	God	into	your	life
again.	The	moment	that	God	enters	your	life,	life	is	a	blessing,	otherwise	it	is	a
curse	and	a	heavy	burden.
And	 unnecessarily	 too.	 If	 there	 is	 no	 God	 then	 suicide	 seems	 to	 be	 the	most
intelligent	way	to	get	out	of	this	whole	mess.	If	there	is	God	then	life	has	to	be
lived	more	 deeply,	 more	 joyously,	 more	 prayerfully	 so	 that	 we	 can	 know	 the
ultimate	mystery	of	existence.	Then	death	 is	not	going	 to	destroy	us.	We	were
before	birth	and	we	will	be	after	death.	But	this	is	possible	only	if	the	whole	of
existence	is	full	of	meaning,	otherwise	it	would	not	be	possible.
To	me	God	is	not	a	person.	It	is	the	meaningfulness	of	existence.	It	is	a	presence
rather	than	a	person.
So	 there	 is	no	need	 to	 conceive	of	God,	of	how	he	 looks,	how	 tall	 he	 is,	 how
old...	There	is	no	need	for	all	these	childish	stories.
Godliness	is	eternal.	All	that	is	needed	is	that	you	create	emptiness	in	yourself	--
not	that	you	seek	God.
The	 moment	 you	 are	 empty	 something	 from	 the	 beyond	 penetrates	 you,	 fills
your	emptiness.	You	start	overflowing	with	something	absolutely	new	which	you
have	never	tasted,	never	known	before.	It	is	such	a	blessing,	such	a	benediction.
It	is	such	an	ecstasy	that	from	that	very	moment	you	know	that	there	is	no	birth,
no	 death;	 you	 are	 also	 eternal.	 From	 that	 very	 moment	 you	 are	 part	 of	 a
tremendous	energy	called	godliness.	Godliness	is	like	an	oceanic	energy;	we	are
just	waves	in	it.
We	are	making	every	effort	here	to	help	you,	 through	different	devices,	so	that
you	can	feel	the	presence	of	something	which	escapes	ordinary	intellect,	which
needs	extraordinary	intelligence	to	be	grasped,	which	really	needs	less	logic	and
more	love,	less	head	and	more	heart.
Bliss	 immediately	 starts	 happening	 if	 you	 remember	 that	 God	 loves,	 that	 he
needs	you,	that	you	are	not	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
superficial,	that	you	are	not	accidental,	that	you	are	fulfilling	a	certain	purpose	in
existence,	that	you	are	working	for	God	in	your	own	small	way.
The	moment	we	 realise	 this	 great	 rejoicing	 arises	 in	 the	 heart.	Then	 life	 is	 no
more	 meaningless,	 it	 starts	 having	 great	 significance.	 We	 are	 messengers,
messages,	and	we	are	doing	something	greater	than	ourselves.
And	 God's	 love	 is	 showering	 on	 us,	 otherwise	 we	 could	 not	 live	 a	 single
moment.	His	love	is	our	very	breath.	Without	him	there	is	no	life.
Remember	 it	more	 and	more,	 remind	 yourself	 of	 it	more	 and	more,	 so	 that	 it
becomes	a	constant	undercurrent	in	your	consciousness.	You	will	start	blooming,
flowering,	and	the	darkness	will	start	disappearing.	Just	to	know	that	God	loves
you	kindles	a	light	in	you	which	cannot	be	extinguished	by	any	external	force.
God	never	becomes	old.	Although	all	the	religions	depict	him	as	a	very	old	man,
that's	utterly	wrong.
People	conceive	of	God	as	a	very	very	ancient,	old	man	with	a	long	white	beard
touching	the	floor.	That	is	not	true.	God	is	young,	as	young	as	one	can	be.	He	is
the	very	essence	of	youth.	He	is	as	new	as	fresh	dewdrops	early	in	the	morning,
as	new	as	a	bud	just	opening;	not	even	completely	open,	just	opening,	becoming
a	flower.
Man's	mind	becomes	old,	and	because	his	mind	has	been	creating	God,	God	is
depicted	as	old.	Man's	mind	is	accumulative.	It	is	nothing	but	the	whole	past.	It
knows	nothing	of	newness;	hence	mind	knows	nothing	of	God	If	one	wants	 to
know	about	God	one	has	to	drop	the	mind.
Sannyas	means	dropping	the	mind,	entering	into	the	world	of	no-mind,	changing
your	gestalt	 from	 thought	 to	no-thought,	 from	words	 to	wordless	 silence,	 from
the	past	to	the	present.	When	you	are	utterly	in	the	present	you	are	in	tune	with
God.	Then	you	know,	then	you	feel,	then	you	understand,	because	then	you	are
it.	There	is	no	separation,	you	are	bridged	with	the	whole.
Jan	means	God's	gracious	gift.
It	 is	 the	most	 fundamental	 thing	 to	 understand,	 because	without	 it	 there	 is	 no
possibility	of	religion.
Deep	down	in	the	heart	it	has	to	be	understood	that	life	is	a	gift	of	tremendous
value,	 that	 each	moment	 is	 precious,	 that	 it	 has	 not	 to	 be	wasted.	 It	 is	 a	 great
opportunity	 to	 grow.	 One	 should	 not	 go	 on	 collecting	 coloured	 stones	 and
seashells	on	the	sea-beach.	Something	more	important	has	to	be	done,	something
more	significant.
One	has	 to	 look	 inwards.	One	 should	not	 remain	 concerned	 just	 about	outside
things	 because	 that's	 how	 people	waste	 their	 lives.	One	 should	 start	 searching
within	 --	 "Who	 am	 I?"	 One	 should	 go	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 one's
consciousness	 to	 feel	 one's	 centre.	 The	 moment	 that	 you	 fell	 your	 centre	 all
questions	are	answered,	all	puzzles	disappear.	There	is	no	confusion	any	more.
Everything	 is	a	clarity,	a	 tremendous	clarity.	You	can	see	 through	and	through.
And	that	is	the	moment	when	one	understands	how	much	the	universe	has	given
to	us,	and	how	ungrateful	we	have	been	to	the	universe.
Gratitude	is	 the	basic	requirement	for	a	religious	life.	 It	 is	out	of	gratitude	that
prayer	arises,	it	is	out	of	gratitude	that	love	arises,	it	is	out	of	gratitude	that	grace
arises.	But	one	can	feel	gratitude	only	if	one	feels	the	value,	the	immense	value
of	life,	the	inestimable	value	of	existence.
Go	beyond	knowledge	if	you	want	really	to	know,	go	beyond	all	information	if
you	really	want	to	see.
Information	 functions	 as	 dust	 in	 your	 eyes.	 It	 does	 not	 allow	 you	 to	 see	 that
which	is.
One	 has	 to	 unburden	 oneself	 of	 knowledge,	 information,	 scripture,	 systems	 of
thought,	 ideologies:	 political,	 social	 and	 religious.	 No	 word	 is	 sacred,	 only
silence	is	sacred.	No	thought	is	original,	only	silence	is	original.	And	when	you
move	 into	silence,	 into	a	wordless	world,	you	are	moving	 into	God,	 into	bliss,
into	freedom,	into	the	ultimate.
Stefano	means	voice	--	divine	voice.
It	is	always	there,	at	the	innermost	core	of	our	being,	we	just	have	to	be	a	little
more	 silent	 to	 hear	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 still,	 small	 voice.	 God	 is	 constantly	 trying	 to
communicate	with	you.	It	is	not	only	that	man	is	seeking	God,	far	more	true	is
that	God	is	seeking	man.
In	 the	Bible	 the	story	 is	 that	when	Adam	and	Eve	became	aware	 that	 they	had
disobeyed,	 they	 became	 frightened:	 sooner	 or	 later	 they	 will	 be	 found.	When
God	called	them	they	were	hiding	behind	some	bushes.
God	was	 calling	 the,	 "Adam,	 Eve,	where	 are	 you?"	And	 they	went	 on	 hiding
from	 one	 place	 to	 another	 place	 until	 they	 were	 found	 and	 thrown	 out	 of
paradise.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	my	feeling	is	that	the	story	still	continues,	it	has	not	come	to	a	full	stop.	God
is	still	asking:	Where	are	you...?	And	we	are	still	hiding.
The	best	way	would	have	been	for	Adam	and	Eve	to	have	come	the	God,	to	have
asked	for	his	forgiveness.	But	rather	than	asking	to	be	forgiven	they	were	trying
to	hide.	The	moment	you	start	hiding	something	you	become	false,	you	become
inauthentic.	The	moment	you	open	yourself	up	totally	without	hiding	anything,
the	 moment	 you	 are	 utterly	 naked	 before	 God	 you	 are	 forgiven,	 immediately
forgiven,	all	is	forgiven.
God	 is	 still	calling	us	 from	every	heart,	but	we	have	 to	prepare	 first	 --	how	 to
listen?	We	have	forgotten	the	art	of	listening.	Our	heads	are	so	noisy	--	so	much
turmoil,	 so	much	 traffic,	 thoughts,	desires,	memories,	 imagination.	 It	 is	always
rush	hour,	day	in,	day	out.
Sannyas	means	that	now	you	will	make	every	possible	effort	to	make	this	noisy
mind	a	little	more	quiet,	a	little	more	silent,	so	that	you	can	hear	your	own	heart
and	its	message.
(To	Spider):	Who	has	given	you	such	a	spiritual	name?	(laughter)
--	My	parents.
--	That's	really	something!	(more	laughter)
It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 name;	 particularly	 in	 Indian	 mythology	 it	 is	 very	 significant
because	 the	 spider	 is	 the	 only	 being	 which	 creates	 its	 world	 out	 of	 itself.	 It
creates	its	web	out	of	itself	and	when	it	wants	to	move	it	swallows	the	web	again
and	it	will	move,	and	again	it	can	produce	it.
In	Indian	mythology	it	is	said	God	functions	exactly	like	the	spider.	He	creates
the	whole	world	out	of	himself,	and	when	he	feels	tired,	exhausted,	he	swallows
it	up,	everything	disappears.	But	then	he	start	feeling	lonely	again	and	he	creates
it	again.
In	every	mythology	of	the	world	there	are	stories	about	the	creation	of	the	world,
but	 only	 in	 Indian	mythology	 ares	 those	 stories	 balanced	 by	 the	 dissolution	 --
stories	of	how	the	world	disappears.	Otherwise	they	are	half	stories:	God	created
the	world,	so	it	is	finished	once	and	forever.	But	in	Indian	mythology	millions	of
times	he	has	 created	 the	world	 and	millions	of	 times	he	has	withdrawn	 it	 into
himself.
The	problem	is	--	it	is	the	same	problem	as	every	human	being	comes	across	--
one	 cannot	 live	 alone,	 one	 cannot	 live	with	 somebody	 either.	 If	 you	 live	with
somebody	it	is	tiring;	it	creates	clashes,	conflicts,	one	wants	to	be	finished	with
it.	But	when	 you	 are	 alone	 you	 start	 feeling	 lonely,	 bored.	 This	whole	 human
dilemma	has	been	projected	onto	God.
Other	 mythologies	 project	 only	 half	 part.	 In	 that	 way	 Indian	 mythologies	 are
more	logical,	they	project	the	whole	thing.	The	Indian	god	is	very	human,	just	a
magnified	 form,	 a	 bigger	 human	 being,	 an	 infinite	 human	 being,	 but	 he	 is
human.	He	creates	the	world,	then	he	starts	feeling	lonely.	And	then	he	becomes
tired	of	the	relationship	with	the	world	and	of	all	the	people	praying	and	asking
him	 "Do	 this,	 do	 that,"	 and	 of	 everybody	 complaining	 and	 nobody	 being
satisfied.	Then,	enough	is	enough;	he	says	"Withdraw.	It	will	never	commit	the
same	crime	again."	But	after	few	days	he	forgets	(laughter)...	 then	he	is	lonely,
he	creates	again.	The	spider	is	the	symbol	of	this	very	process.
So	tell	your	parents	that	they	must	have	been	Hindus	in	some	past	life!	(laughter)
This	is	your	name:	Swami	Deva	Spider	--	divine	spider.	Good!
God	happens	only	to	those	who	are	of	humble	heart.	But	it	is	a	humility	which	is
not	practised.
One	can	practise	humility.	The	society	teaches	us	to	practise	being	humble:	Be
humble	 because	 you	 will	 be	 respected	 if	 you	 are	 humble.	 Now	what	 kind	 of
nonsense	 is	 this?	Telling	 people	 "You	will	 be	 respected	 if	 you	 are	 humble"	 is
simply	 giving	 new	 nourishment	 to	 the	 ego.	 Now	 in	 the	 name	 of	 humbleness
there	 will	 be	 a	 subtle	 ego	 hiding,	 because	 humbleness	 brings	 respect,
respectability.	And	the	more	you	see	that	people	respect	you,	 the	more	humble
you	will	become.	But	deep	down	the	ego	is	becoming	stronger	and	stronger.
The	 so-called	humble	people	have	 the	 strongest	 egos	 in	 the	world.	The	 saints,
the	mahatmas	and	the	so-called	religious	people	are	 the	most	egoistic,	 they	are
pious	egoists.	That	is	not	real	humility.
Real	humbleness,	real	humility	comes	by	understanding	the	ego,	the	ways	of	the
ego,	how	it	functions,	how	it	goes	on	creating	itself,	how	it	goes	on	coming	back
in	subtle	ways.	You	close	one	door,	it	opens	another;	you	don't	allow	it	from	the
front	door,	it	comes	from	the	back	door.	One	has	to	be	very	watchful,	alert	about
the	ways	of	the	ego,	that's	all.
Slowly	 slowly	 you	 know	 all	 its	 diplomatic	 strategies:	 how	 it	 survives,	 how	 it
perpetuates	itself.	It	is	a	false	entity,	it	is	a	parasite.	It	lives	on	your	blood,	It	kills
your	soul.	When	you	see	it	and	the	whole	nuisance	that	it	goes	on	doing	to	you
and	 your	 life,	 when	 you	 see	 the	 calamity	 that	 comes	 through	 it,	 in	 its	 utter
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nudity,	in	that	very	moment	you	are	freed	from	it.	Now	it	cannot	deceive	you.
The	first	words	of	the	Buddha	when	he	became	enlightened	were...	He	looked	at
the	sky	and	said:	Listen,	now	there	will	be	no	need	of	you	to	make	another	house
for	me,	another	shelter,	another	security.	 I	am	utterly	free	of	you.	 I	will	not	be
coming	back	again	because	I	am	no	more	trapped	within	your	net.
To	whom	was	he	talking?	He	was	saying	goodbye	to	his	ego,	he	was	saying:	I
am	 finished.	 I	 have	 seen	 you	 --	 you	 are	 false,	 I	 have	 seen	 that	 you	 are	 just	 a
shadow.	 I	have	believed	enough	 in	you	and	 through	 that	belief	 I	have	suffered
long.
In	that	moment	of	understanding	one	becomes	humble.	That	humbleness	opens
the	 door	 for	God	 to	 come	 in.	 The	moment	 ego	 goes	 out,	 God	 comes	 in.	 The
moment	you	are	not,	God	is.
Courage	 is	 like	 bliss,	 like	 truth,	 like	 love:	 it	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	 can
manage;	otherwise	there	would	be	nobody	who	is	a	coward.	Every	coward	wants
to	be	courageous;	he	tries	in	every	possible	way,	he	pretends,	he	creates	a	facade
of	courage.	It	hurts	 to	feel	 that	one	is	cowardly.	One	wants	 to	hide	 it,	not	only
from	others	but	 from	oneself	 too.	One	does	not	want	 to	 recognise	 the	fact	 that
one	is	cowardly.	One	pretends	 to	be	brave.	One	goes	 to	extremes	to	prove	that
one	 is	 brave,	 sometimes	 to	 foolish	 extremes,	 sometimes	 on	 tries	 to
overcompensate.	 But	 these	 are	 not	 the	 right	 ways;	 the	 coward	 remains	 the
coward.	On	the	surface	he	may	look	brave,	but	scratch	him	just	a	little	and	all	his
cowardliness	 starts	 rising	 up.	 In	 a	 real	 situation	 he	 will	 escape,	 In	 an	 unreal
situation	he	will	remain	very	courageous.
Aman	and	his	wife	were	passing	through	a	forest	and	suddenly	they	encountered
a	 dangerous	 tiger.	 The	 husband	 completely	 forgot	 all	 his	 manliness,	 all	 his
bravery,	and	all	his	pretensions.	He	went	behind	the	woman,	behind	his	wife.
The	wife	cried,	"What	are	you	doing?	You	are	supposed	to	face	the	danger,	you
have	to	protect	me.	You	have	always	been	saying	that	you	could	even	face	death
for	me	--	now	it	is	time	to	prove	it!"
He	said	"Yes,	I	can	face	death,	but	this	tiger	is	alive,	he	is	not	dead!"	(laughter)
Just	 scratch	 a	 little;	 pretensions	 never	 go	 deeper	 than	 the	 skin,	 they	 remain
something	painted	just	on	the	skin.
Real	courage	is	a	gift	of	God.	One	can	pray	for	it,	one	cannot	do	anything	else.
One	can	surrender	to	God	totally,	and	say	to	him	"Make	of	me	whatsoever	you
want	to	make.	Let	thy	will	be	done.	If	you	want	me	to	be	a	coward	it's	perfectly
okay,	I	will	be	a	coward.	If	that's	what	your	will	is	I	will	follow	it	joyously.
If	you	want	me	 to	be	miserable.	 I	will	not	complain.	Even	 if	you	send	death	 I
will	welcome	 it.	 So	whatsoever	 your	will	 is,	 is	 going	 to	 be	my	will."	 That	 is
surrender	and	that	is	sannyas.
Sannyas	is	essentially	surrender	to	the	whole.	Then	a	great	courage	arises.	Then
one	 cannot	 be	 cowardly,	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 afraid	 of.	 When	 one	 has
surrendered	the	ego	why	should	one	be	full	of	fear?
All	fear	exists	as	a	shadow	of	the	ego.	The	ego	is	the	root	cause	of	cowardliness.
The	ego	gone,	all	cowardliness	disappears.	And	then	there	is	a	courage	which	is
not	yours	but	which	is	God's.
Remember	it,	all	that	is	great	is	always	God's.
Rudi	literally	means	a	wolf;	it	is	s	short	form	of	Rudolf.	Symbolically	it	means
two	things;	loyalty	and	courage.
Mythologically	the	wolf	has	been	thought	to	be	very	courageous	and	very	loyal.
In	fact	to	be	loyal	one	needs	to	be	courageous.	To	trust	in	somebody	needs	guts,
it	 is	 not	 for	 the	 cowardly	 person.	 The	 cowardly	 always	 doubts,	 he	 is	 always
suspicious	because	he	is	always	afraid.	Out	of	his	fear	he	suspects,	doubts;	he	is
always	defending	himself,	protecting	himself,	guarding.	He	remains	closed.	He
cannot	be	loyal,	he	cannot	be	trusting,	he	cannot	be	surrendered.
Sannyas	 is	 a	 surrender,	 surrender	 to	 existence.	Ordinarily	we	are	 fighting	with
existence,	 that's	how	we	have	been	brought	up.	We	have	been	brought	up	with
the	idea	of	fighting,	of	being	aggressive,	because	that	is	the	way	to	succeed.
Sannyas	 means	 that	 we	 are	 no	 more	 concerned	 with	 success	 at	 all.	 We	 are
concerned	with	peace,	silence,	bliss,	truth,	freedom,	god.	We	are	not	concerned
with	success	at	all.	Even	if	you	succeed	death	is	going	to	destroy	everything,	so
it	has	been	a	sheer	wastage	of	your	life.	You	may	have	money,	power,	prestige,
but	all	will	be	taken	away.	But	if	you	have	known	love	it	will	go	with	you.	If	you
have	known	 freedom	 it	will	 go	with	you.	 If	 you	have	known	 truth	 even	death
cannot	take	it	away.
These	are	 real	 treasures.	But	 they	can	be	attained	only	 if	one	surrenders	 to	 the
whole.	You	cannot	snatch	 them	away	from	reality.	You	have	 to	 love	so	deeply
that	you	can	surrender.	You	have	to	love	so	totally	that	you	can	trust	the	whole.
You	 have	 to	 disappear	 as	 a	 separate	 entity,	 you	 have	 to	 become	 part	 of	 the
infinity,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
just	a	wave	in	the	infinite	ocean	of	god.
Martin	means	a	loyal	spirit.	It	means	one	who	is	capable	of	trusting,	one	who	is
capable	of	love	--	so	much	so	that	he	disappears	in	his	love.
The	ego	only	knows	how	to	say	no,	but	when	the	ego	disappears	there	arises	a
total	yes:	yes	to	life,	yes	to	all	that	is.	That	is	the	meaning	of	being	loyal,	loyal	to
existence:	being	in	a	deep	love	affair	with	existence,	not	feeling	oneself	separate,
feeling	one	with	the	whole,	with	no	fear,	holding	nothing	back,	going	totally	and
whole-heartedly.
The	moment	one	can	do	it,	one	 is	 transformed.	The	moment	one	can	do	it,	 the
ego	dies	and	one	is	born.
The	real	birth,	the	birth	of	the	soul	comes	through	a	total	yes.
The	 traditional	 sense	 of	 being	 holy	 is	 egoistic.	 It	 is	 a	 new	 form	 of	 egoism.
Somebody	 is	 bragging	 about	 his	 money,	 somebody	 is	 bragging	 out	 his	 birth,
blood,	nobility,	aristocracy,	somebody	is	bragging	about	his	political	power.	And
somebody	is	bragging	about	his	virtues,	his	prayers,	his	fasts,	his	austerities.	But
it	is	the	same	bragging	--	no	difference	at	all.	The	ego	is	the	ego.	By	what	it	is
nourished	is	of	no	consequence,	 it	makes	no	difference.	It	can	be	supported	by
anything.
You	can	support	it	with	a	rock,	you	can	support	it	with	gold,	you	can	support	it
with	diamonds,	but	it	is	the	same	ego.	Only	the	support	changes,	the	ego	remains
the	same.
When	I	use	 the	word	"holy"	I	use	 it	 in	 the	sense	of	wholeness,	 in	 the	sense	of
being	 total.	 To	 be	whole	 is	 to	 be	 holy.	And	whenever	 you	 are	whole	 the	 ego
disappears.	 It	can	exist	only	when	you	are	 fragmentary,	when	you	are	divided,
split.	The	more	you	are	divided,	the	better	for	the	ego.	It	rules	you	by	dividing
you.
Once	you	are	one,	integrated,	crystallised,	the	ego	evaporates	just	like	dewdrops
in	the	early	morning	sun.
Living	a	holy	 life	means	 living	each	moment	 totally,	without	holding	anything
back.	 If	 you	 are	 dancing	 then	 become	 the	 dance,	 and	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 of
holiness.	 If	you	are	 singing,	become	 the	song.	 If	you	are	 loving,	become	 love.
Whatsoever	 you	 are	 doing,	 do	 it	 with	 such	 joy,	 with	 such	 totality,	 with	 such
involvement,	commitment	that	you	are	no	more	separate	from	it.	And	soon	you
will	 see	 that	 this	 continuous	experience	of	being	 totally	 involved	 integrates	all
your	 fragments	 into	oneness.	 It	moulds	you	 into	 an	 individual,	 into	 something
indivisible.	That	is	being	holy.
It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 being	 Christian	 or	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan,	 but	 it
absolutely	has	something	to	do	with	the	ultimate,	because	when	you	are	total	you
become	 available	 to	 the	 ultimate.	When	 you	 are	 total	 you	 are	 silent;	 all	 those
fighting	fragments	are	no	more	there,	no	noise	is	there.	There	is	great	stillness,
and	in	that	stillness	God	can	descend.
God	 is	whole,	 and	unless	we	are	 also	whole	 in	our	own	 small	way	we	cannot
know	anything	of	God	And	one	thing	is	beautiful	about	being	whole:	even	if	you
are	whole	in	your	small	way...	The	bigger	whole	and	the	smaller	whole	are	not
really	different.	It	 is	like	a	small	circle	and	a	bigger	circle;	both	are	circles.	As
far	 as	 their	 being	 circles	 is	 concerned,	 both	 are	 perfect	 circles.	 Quantitatively
they	may	be	different	but	qualitatively	they	are	not.
And	that's	the	beauty	of	being	whole.	You	will	be	a	small	circle	and	God	is	the
infinite	circle,	but	that	makes	no	difference.	The	moment	you	are	a	circle,	entire,
one,	you	know	the	quality	of	being	a	god,	you	become	divine.
By	purity	I	don't	mean	anything	moral.	By	purity	I	mean	innocence,	a	childlike
innocence	--	that's	what	purity	is.
A	moralist	is	not	pure,	he	cannot	be.	His	every	step	is	calculated.	Even	his	virtue
is	a	bargaining.	He	is	doing	all	kings	of	things,	destroying	all	kind	of	desires	in
order	 to	 attain	 paradise	 and	 heavenly	 pleasures.	 It	 is	 all	 bargaining.	 Any
calculated	move	is	bound	to	be	impure.
Only	small	children	move	spontaneously,	without	any	calculation.	Their	action	is
without	motive.	 It	 is	 simply	 a	 response	 to	 the	present	 situation.	So	 is	 the	 case
with	the	real	sage.	He	lives	spontaneously,	moment	to	moment,	he	is	not	worried
about	 the	 future.	 He	 does	 not	 care	 about	 paradise,	 he	 is	 not	 afraid	 of	 hell	 or
greedy	for	heaven.	He	simply	 joyously	 lives	 the	moment	 that	 is	available.	 In	a
way	his	life	is	just	like	a	small	child's	life.
The	child	is	innocent	because	he	is	ignorant	of	the	world	and	worldly	ways	and
all	kinds	of	cunningnesses	and	deceptions.	He	has	not	yet	entered	into	the	mud;
hence	he	is	clean.	But	sooner	or	later	he	will	have	to	enter	into	the	mud,	into	the
muddy	waters	and	then	he	will	lose	his	innocence.	Every	child	is	bound	to	lose
his	innocence.	That	innocence	is	temporary	and	is	inevitably	lost.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	 grow,	 it	 is	 necessary	 to	 lose	 it.	 But	 then	 one	 can	 attain	 to	 a	 new	 kind	 of
innocence.	Living	in	the	world,	seeing	its	futility,	seeing	its	utter	ridiculousness,
one	becomes	detached,	cool.	One	is	no	more	involved	in	it.	One	passes	through
it	 but	 just	 as	 a	 witness,	 just	 like	 a	 mirror:	 reflecting	 everything	 and	 yet	 not
affected	by	anything.
That	 is	 the	 second	 kind	 of	 innocence,	 the	 innocence	 of	 the	 sage.	 It	 cannot	 be
destroyed;	 you	 cannot	 lose	 it.	Once	 it	 is	 gained	 it	 is	 yours	 forever.	Hence	 the
sage	is	like	the	child	in	one	sense	only,	they	are	both	innocent.	But	the	child	is
bound	to	 lose	his	gift	because	he	has	not	earned	it,	 it	 is	a	natural	gift.	And	the
sage	has	earned	 it,	 it	 is	not	a	gift;	 it	 is	 the	reward	of	his	maturity.	The	child	 is
innocent	because	he	is	ignorant,	and	the	sage	is	innocent	because	he	is	wise.	The
second	innocence	is	called	divine	innocence.
Keep	on	reminding	yourself:	that	is	the	goal.
Beauty	 is	 the	most	 divine	 phenomenon	 in	 life.	 It	 is	 through	 the	 beautiful	 that
man	has	become	aware	of	god,	through	a	beautiful	sunset,	a	beautiful	night	full
of	stars,	beautiful	showers,	mountains,	clouds,	people.
It	is	impossible	to	think	that	there	is	no	god.	If	life	is	so	beautiful	there	must	be
somebody	behind	all	this	beauty,	some	great	artist.
The	beauty	of	the	world	is	enough	proof	of	a	great	painter,	of	a	poet,	of	a	lover.
God	is	nothing	but	a	presence	that	one	feels	when	one	becomes	overwhelmed	by
beauty.	Hence	I	don't	suggest	you	go	to	the	temple	or	the	mosque	or	the	church.
But	I	certainly	suggest	you	go	to	the	mountains,	to	the	forest,	to	the	rivers,	to	the
ocean,	because	it	is	there	that	you	will	have	your	first	glimpse	of	God's	presence.
There	is	beauty	which	is	only	of	the	body.	It	does	not	go	very	deep,	it	is	not	even
skin	 deep.	 It	 is	 superficial,	 it	 is	 only	 an	 appearance.	 But	 there	 is	 a	 totally
different	 kind	 of	 beauty	 which	 belongs	 to	 the	 center	 and	 not	 to	 the
circumference,	which	arises	from	your	 innermost	core	and	spreads	 towards	 the
circumference.	The	circumference	also	becomes	luminous	because	of	it,	but	it	is
not	on	 the	 circumference,	 it	 comes	 from	 the	 center.	That	 is	divine	beauty,	 and
divine	beauty	is	eternal.
Physical	 beauty	 is	 there	 today	 and	 tomorrow	 it	 is	 gone.	 Anything	 bodily	 is
momentary.	 And	 I	 am	 not	 against	 the	 body	 --	 remember	 it.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful
mechanism,	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 house.	 Take	 every	 care	 of	 it	 but	 don't	 become
obsessed	with	it.	Human	beings	have	become	too	obsessed	with	the	body.	Their
whole	effort	is	how	to	keep	it	beautiful	and	they	have	completely	forgotten	that
something	 more	 needs	 to	 be	 beautiful,	 not	 just	 the	 body	 and	 its	 proportions.
Some	inner	grace	is	needed.	That	grace	arises	out	of	meditation	and	prayer.	That
grace	 arises	 only	 when	 you	 are	 bridged	 with	 God	 and	 God	 starts	 filtering
through	you.
When	 you	 are	 in	 deep	 communion	 with	 existence	 then	 something	 radical
happens	 to	your	being.	Then	you	know	beauty	 for	 the	 first	 time,	a	beauty	 that
transcends	time,	space,	a	beauty	that	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you	by	illness
by	old	age,	a	beauty	that	is	really	yours	forever.	Seek	and	search	for	that	because
that	is	your	true	being.
In	 the	East	we	 have	 defined	God	 as	 satyam,	 shivam,	 sundram.	 Satyam	means
truth,	shivam	means	good,	sundram	means	beauty,	beautiful.	These	are	the	three
qualities	of	God	--	he	is	true,	he	is	good,	he	is	beautiful.	And	these	are	the	three
doors	also	to	enter	into	hi.	Either	one	can	enter	into	him	as	a	seeker	of	truth	or	as
a	seeker	of	good	or	as	a	seeker	of	beauty.
Let	 the	 third	 door	 be	 for	 you:	 enter	 into	 God	 searching	 for	 inner	 beauty,	 for
divine	beauty.
[There	follows	and	interview	with	Swami	Bhakta,	which	is	not	included	here.]
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	Truth
3	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002035
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	WITHME03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Sannyas	is	to	be	true	to	your	original	face.	Then	all	your	fragments	start	melting
into	 each	 other	 and	 they	 create	 a	 centre,	 they	 create	 integrity,	 they	 create
individuality.	And	that's	what	religion	is	all	about.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	god	or	heaven	and	hell	and	all	kinds	of	theories
and	philosophies.	The	basic	concern	of	religion	is	truth.
And	one	has	to	live	it,	only	then	can	one	know	it.
Truth	is	god.
Truth	 does	 not	mean	 a	 conclusion	 arrived	 at	 by	 thinking.	 It	means	 experience
arrived	at	through	living.
Truth	is	not	a	hypothesis;	hence	philosophy	has	no	truth	 in	 it.	Philosophy	goes
round	and	 round,	 it	moves	 in	 circles,	but	 it	 never	 reaches	 the	 target.	 It	 is	only
through	experience,	not	through	thinking,	that	one	arrives	home.
Sannyas	is	a	change	of	gestalt.	From	mind	you	have	to	move	to	the	heart,	from
thinking	to	living,	from	speculating	to	experiencing.	Ordinarily	religious	people
say	"God	is	truth,"	but	I	would	like	to	say	that	that	is	not	right.	Truth	is	God.	If
you	say	"God	is	truth,"	you	have	already	come	to	a	conclusion.	But	truth	is	God.
That	 means	 a	 great	 enquiry	 is	 needed,	 you	 have	 to	 explore	 from	 within	 and
without.
And	sannyas	is	exploration	of	truth.	It	is	not	belief,	it	is	discovery.
Truth	is	not	something	which	has	to	be	achieved.	It	is	already	inside	us.	We	are
it,	the	seeker	is	the	sought.	But	we	go	on	rushing	hither	and	thither	searching	for
the	truth.	We	will	never	find	it	anywhere	else;	hence	the	only	way	to	find	it	is	to
stop	seeking	it	outside.	The	only	way	to	find	it	is	to	sit	silently	and	look	within.
It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 doing	 something,	 it	 is	 more	 a	 question	 of	 not	 doing
anything.	When	you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 of	 non-doing,	 utterly	 relaxed,	 it	 happens,	 it
wells	up.	It	has	always	been	there	but	you	have	never	been	there.	The	meeting
happens	when	you	are	also	inside.
Truth	or	God	is	waiting	there	in	your	very	heart;	don't	go	on	knocking	on	other's
doors.	There	is	no	need	to	go	to	any	church,	any	temple,	any	mosque.	There	is
no	need	to	search	in	the	Bible,	in	the	Koran,	in	the	Vedas.
Stop	all	seeking	and	searching	and	find	it.	In	fact	immediately	one	finds	it.	It	is
such	a	joy	to	see	that	which	we	have	been	searching	for	lives	together	and	over
which	we	were	always	being	frustrated	because	every	effort	was	doomed	to	fail.
When	 truth	 is,	 we	 are	 not.	 We	 are	 the	 only	 barrier.	 The	 ego	 is	 like	 a	 wall
surrounding	you,	it	is	your	imprisonment.	So	truth	can	never	be	an	achievement,
because	 all	 achievements	 are	 through	 the	 ego.	 The	 ego	 thinks	 in	 terms	 of
achievement.
Truth	comes	to	you	not	as	an	achievement	but	as	a	gift.	Neither	is	it	a	reward.	It
is	not	that	you	are	worthy,	pious,	virtuous,	so	you	will	be	rewarded	by	truth.	It
comes	 to	 those	 who	 are	 ready	 to	 receive	 it,	 welcome	 it.	 It	 does	 not	 matter
whether	you	are	a	saint	or	a	sinner,	it	knocks	on	everybody's	doors.	It	makes	no
distinctions	 between	 sinners	 and	 saints.	 The	 guest	 comes	 to	 anybody	 who	 is
ready	to	open	the	door	and	welcome	it.
The	 whole	 art	 of	 allowing	 the	 truth	 to	 take	 possession	 of	 you	 is	 of	 being
vulnerable,	of	being	open,	of	being	in	a	let-go.	Or	in	other	words,	the	whole	art
consists	of	one	word,	"surrender'.
And	 that's	what	 sannyas	 is,	 that's	my	 definition	 of	 a	 sannyasin:	 a	man	who	 is
surrendered	to	existence	so	totally	that	he	never	thinks	in	terms	of	achievement
any	more,	because	he	is	no	more.	Who	is	there	to	achieve?	--	he	has	disappeared
totally,	 he	 has	 not	 left	 even	 a	 trace	 behind.	 In	 that	 very	 moment,	 when	 you
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	just	a	pure	nothingness,	truth	arrives.	It	is	a	gift	of	God.
Earnestness,	sincerity,	authenticity	--	these	are	the	foundations	of	sannyas.
They	are	not	different	things	but	different	aspects	of	the	same	phenomenon.	One
has	 to	be	utterly	 truthful	about	oneself.	One	need	not	hide,	only	cowards	hide.
The	courageous	person	remains	as	he	is,	naked.	He	is	ready	to	accept	whatsoever
the	consequences,	but	he	is	not	ready	to	compromise	his	truth.	This	is	the	only
way	to	become	an	individual,	this	is	the	only	way	to	have	integrity.
The	world	teaches	people	to	be	pseudo,	to	be	compromising.	The	world	makes
people	deceptive,	false.
All	your	so-called	morality,	character,	 respectability,	 is	nothing	but	an	effort	 to
create	 a	 facade	 so	 you	 can	hide	 your	 reality,	 you	 can	hide	 and	you	 can	go	on
showing	 a	 false	 face	 to	 the	world.	Whatsoever	 is	 expected	 from	you,	 you	 can
show	it	to	the	world.	But	a	man	who	hides	his	reality	and	shows	his	falseness	to
the	world	becomes	split,	he	becomes	two.	In	fact	he	becomes	many,	because	in
each	situation	he	has	to	use	a	different	face.
You	can't	use	the	same	face	with	your	wife	that	you	use	with	your	girlfriend.	You
can't	use	the	same	face	with	the	boss	that	you	use	with	your	servant.	You	have	to
carry	many	faces	so	that	whatsoever	the	requirement	of	the	situation,	you	wear	a
mask.	Slowly	slowly	it	becomes	automatic.	You	need	not	change,	they	change	of
their	own	accord.	To	be	in	such	a	state	means	to	be	miserable,	mad,	divided	in
thousands	of	pieces.	Life	will	be	a	chaos	and	a	misery	and	a	hell.
But	one	can	drop	the	facade,	one	can	drop	all	the	masks.	That's	what	sannyas	is:
to	be	true,	to	be	your	original	face.	And	then	suddenly	you	start	feeling	a	kind	of
strength	which	was	never	there	before,	because	you	start	becoming	one.	All	your
fragments	 start	 melting	 into	 each	 other	 and	 they	 create	 a	 centre,	 they	 create
integrity,	they	create	individuality.	Then	one	is	earnest,	sincere,	authentic.
And	 that's	what	 religion	 is	 all	 about.	 Religion	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	God	 or
heaven	or	hell	and	all	kinds	of	theories	and	philosophies.	The	basic	concern	of
religion	 is	 truth.	And	one	has	 to	 live	 it,	only	 then	can	one	know	it,	 there	 is	no
other	way.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 belief,	 it	 has	 to	be	your	own	existential	 experience.	You
have	 to	 experience	 it	 in	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 your	 very	 being.	 And	 that
liberates.	That	brings	freedom	to	you,	bliss	to	you,	benediction	to	you.
Knowledge	is	human,	wisdom	is	always	divine.	Knowledge	comes	through	our
efforts,	 wisdom	 comes	 from	 god	 --	 it	 is	 a	 revelation.	 We	 have	 only	 to	 be
receptive.	We	have	not	to	do	anything,	we	have	just	to	be	open	and	available.	It
is	 not	 like	 science	 --	 so	much	work,	 experiments,	 and	 then	 finally	 you	 arrive
after	many	experiments	at	a	certain	hypotheses.	Then	too	it	is	only	a	hypothesis.
It	 may	 be	 proved	 wrong	 tomorrow,	 some	 new	 facts	 may	 crop	 up.	 It	 is	 never
absolute,	it	is	never	certain.	It	is	temporary,	it	is	for	the	time-being.
Wisdom	is	absolute.	When	you	know,	you	know.	It	never	changes.	What	Buddha
knew,	what	Jesus	knew,	what	Zarathustra	knew	is	the	same,	it	is	not	different.	It
is	 not	 that	 after	 twenty-five	 centuries	 of	 Buddha	 you	will	 discover	 something
else,	no.	It	will	be	the	same	revelation,	absolute	the	same.	Truth	never	changes.
Through	human	effort	we	can	never	reach	the	truth,	we	can	only	reach	a	certain
hypothesis.	And	because	it	is	human	we	can	never	be	absolutely	certain	about	it.
We	 can	use	 it,	 it	 is	 useful,	 but	 it	 is	 not	wisdom.	Albert	Einstein	 knows	much,
maybe	much	more	than	Buddha,	but	he	is	not	a	Buddha,	he	is	not	awakened.	He
has	not	received	the	truth	from	the	beyond,	it	has	not	descended	in	him.	His	is
human	 effort:	 through	 great	 human	 effort	 he	 has	 come	 to	 certain	 conclusions.
But	human	conclusions	are	human;	they	have	a	certain	limitation.
The	search	for	truth	is	not	like	a	scientific	search.	It	is	totally	different.	Scientific
enquiry	 is	aggressive,	 religious	enquiry	 is	 receptive.	Scientific	enquiry	 is	more
masculine,	religious	enquiry	is	more	feminine.
So	be	open,	available,	silent,	listening,	so	that	God	can	reveal	something	to	you.
It	always	comes	as	a	revelation.
We	are	keeping	truth	at	our	backs.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	little	turning	in.
We	 are	 all	 extroverts.	 Our	 education	 makes	 us	 extroverts.	 Society	 needs
extroverts,	 it	 has	 no	 use	 for	 introverts.	 The	 introverts	 cannot	 be	 made	 into
soldiers,	the	introverts	are	almost	as	useless	as	rose	flowers.
You	 can	 appreciate	 a	 rose	 flower	 but	what	 else	 can	 you	 do	with	 it?	 It	 has	 no
utility.	It	has	tremendous	poetry	but	not	utility.
So	 is	 the	 case	 with	 truth:	 it	 has	 great	 poetry,	 great	 joy,	 great	 ecstasy,	 but	 is
absolutely	unmarketable.
You	cannot	reduce	it	to	a	commodity,	you	cannot	sell	it	--	and	the	world	believes
in	selling	and	purchasing.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 world	 is	 a	 marketplace,	 and	 to	 be	 an	 introvert	 is	 to	 be	 out	 of	 the
marketplace.	 Hence	 we	 turn	 every	 child	 into	 an	 extrovert,	 we	 try	 in	 every
possible	way	to	make	sure	that	he	does	not	have	any	idea	that	there	is	something
inside	him.	We	make	him	forget	any	desire	to	go	in.	And	of	course	if	you	teach
every	 child	 for	 twenty-five	 years	 continuously,	 if	 you	 condition	 him,	 hypotise
him,	he	becomes	paralaysed.	He	cannot	turn	his	neck,	it	won't	move;	he	can	only
look	outwards,	truth	is	inside	you.	You	brought	it	with	your	birth.
My	work	here	 is	 just	 to	help	you,	 to	de-hypnotise	you,	 to	uncondition	you,	 to
undo	what	the	society	has	done	to	you.	It	is	anti-social	work.	Hence	the	society
was	 perfectly	 right	 in	 crucifying	 Jesus:	 he	was	 an	 antisocial	 element.	 So	was
Socrates,	so	is	every	awakened	person.	He	has	to	sabotage,	he	has	to	destroy	the
structure	 that	 society	 creates	 around	 you.	 He	 has	 to	 bring	 you	 to	 your	 inner
reality.
That	does	not	mean	 that	you	cannot	work	outside.	Being	an	 introvert	does	not
mean	 that	 you	become	 fixated.	One	 should	 be	 flexible.	One	 should	 be	 able	 to
come	in,	to	come	out	easily,	without	any	difficulty.
So	whatsoever	is	needed...	if	you	are	needed	on	the	outside	you	can	be	available,
if	you	are	needed	 inside	you	can	be	available.	Then	you	know	both	prose	and
poetry,	then	you	know	both	logic	and	love,	then	you	can	be	in	the	marketplace
and	yet	be	in	yourself.
The	seeker	of	truth	has	to	go	beyond	doubt,	has	to	drop	doubting,	because	doubt
keeps	you	 tethered	 to	 the	mind,	doubt	 is	 the	method	of	 the	mind.	 If	you	doubt
you	can	never	go	beyond	mind.	It	is	through	trust	that	one	goes	beyond	mind.	It
is	through	trust	that	one	goes	beyond	mind.	And	truth	is	beyond	mind.
Nobody	has	ever	discovered	truth	through	mind	--	not	a	single	individual	in	the
whole	 history	 of	 humanity.	 Many	 have	 discovered	 truth	 but	 they	 have	 all
discovered	through	trust,	not	through	doubt.
So	one	has	to	go	beyond	doubt	and	one	has	to	learn	the	language	of	trust.	Doubt
is	the	language	of	logic,	trust	is	the	language	of	love.	We	all	live	in	doubt,	we	are
all	doubting	Thomases	because	we	all	live	in	the	mind.	The	society	perpetuates
the	mind,	all	the	educational	systems	strengthen	the	mind.	And	the	more	stronger
the	mind	becomes,	 the	 less	 is	 the	possibility	of	 love	growing	 in	you.	You	start
doubting	 even	 the	 existence	 of	 love.	You	 start	 doubting	 even	 the	 existence	 of
truth,	so	the	question	of	discovering	truth	does	not	arise	at	all.
Doubt	creates	such	confusion	 in	you	that	you	don't	know	what	 to	do	and	what
not	to	do.	You	go	on	asking	the	same	mind	and	it	goes	on	giving	you	all	kinds	of
answers,	which	are	all	contradictory	to	each	other.	Mind	is	a	[past	?]	master	in
creating	chaos.
Learn	the	way	of	love,	learn	the	way	of	trust.	Even	a	coward	can	doubt;	only	a
courageous	person	can	trust.	Trust	needs	some	guts.	It	means	that	you	are	taking
risks,	it	means	that	you	are	moving	into	the	unknown.	Who	knows?	--	there	is	no
guarantee.	But	there	is	tremendous	joy	in	exploring.	With	a	loving	heart	one	can
go	dancing	into	the	unknown.
Go	beyond	your	doubt,	your	doubting	mind,	and	then	you	will	really	be	a	seeker
of	 truth.	A	 seeker	 of	 truth	neither	 believes	nor	doubts.	He	 is	 simply	 available,
ready,	open,	vulnerable.	He	 is	 ready	 to	go	with	 the	universe	wherever	 it	 leads.
And	 the	 universe	 is	 always	 leading	 you,	 guiding	 you	 towards	 the	 ultimate
expression	of	your	being.
If	you	can	surrender	to	existence,	if	you	can	allow	yourself	to	be	overwhelmed
by	 it,	 then	 the	 transformation	 happens	 so	 easily,	 without	 any	 bloodshed	 and
without	any	damage.	Not	even	scars	are	left	in	you.	One	changes	so	silently,	so
noiselessly,	 as	 if	nothing	has	happened.	On	 the	outside	everything	 remains	 the
same	and	on	the	inside	nothing	is	the	same.
One	can	seek	truth	either	out	of	misery	or	out	of	bliss.	Both	people	are	seekers,
but	 the	 first	 one	 is	 going	 to	 miss,	 he	 will	 never	 reach.	 His	 very	 first	 step	 is
wrong.	Only	the	second	one	arrives.
On	the	surface	both	seek	truth,	but	you	can	find	only	if	you	seek	rightly,	in	the
right	mood,	with	 the	 right	method;	 if	you	 travel	on	 the	 right	path,	 if	you	enter
through	the	right	door.	Otherwise	you	can	go	on	and	on	searching	and	seeking
for	millions	of	lives	and	you	will	not	find.	the	truth.
The	 most	 important	 thing	 is	 the	 first	 step:	 what	 is	 the	 motive?	 That	 is	 very
essential	to	understand.	Why	does	one	want	to	seek	truth?	Is	it	out	of	misery?	--
then	 truth	 is	 an	 escape,	 an	 escape	 from	 your	 misery.	 You	 want	 to	 become
occupied	 with	 something	 so	 far	 away	 ,so	 impossible	 that	 you	 can	 remain
occupied	forever	and	need	not	look	at	your	misery;	so	that	you	can	avoid	your
anxiety,	anguish,	so	that	you	avoid	channeling	your	energies	towards	truth.
But	one	who	is	trying	to	escape	from	himself	in	any	way	will	never	reach	truth,
because	truth	is	within	you.	Truth	is	not	out	there	somewhere.	Truth	is	now,	truth
is	here,	truth	is	within	you.	And	the	person	who	starts	seeking	and	searching	for
truth	because	life	is	miserable	has	already	taken	an	attitude.	He	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
concluded	that	life	is	miserable.	His	mind	has	already	become	prejudiced.
The	real	seeker	has	to	be	without	conclusions,	unprejudiced.	He	has	to	function
out	of	a	state	of	not-knowing,	he	has	to	be	an	agnostic,	neither	atheist	nor	theist.
He	has	to	accept	his	ignorance,	he	has	to	be	sincere	about	his	ignorance.	He	has
to	say	 to	himself	and	 to	others.	"I	don't	know.	And	because	I	don't	know,	how
can	 I	be	a	Christian	and	how	can	 I	be	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Hindu?	Because	 I
don't	know,	how	can	I	be	a	Catholic	or	a	Communist?	Because	I	don't	know,	how
can	I	believe	in	god	or	disbelieve	in	God?"
Disbelief	 is	also	a	belief	 --	a	negative	kind	of	belief.	The	Catholic	believes,	so
does	the	Communist,	he	also	believes.	The	seeker	of	truth	has	to	start	dropping
all	beliefs,	disbeliefs	and	is	not	to	have	any	conclusion.	He	has	to	start	moving
towards	truth	with	a	cheerful	heart,	because	only	when	the	heart	 is	cheerful	do
you	 become	 available	 to	 existence.	 Just	 look	 at	 the	 trees,	 clouds,	 stars...	 The
whole	universe	is	in	an	eternal	dance.	It	is	an	orgy	of	joy,	a	non-ending	carnival.
It	goes	on	and	on.	It	is	sheer	festivity.
So	unless	you	move	through	cheerfulness,	blissfulness,	you	will	not	be	moving
in	the	right	direction,	you	will	not	fall	in	tune	with	existence.	And	the	moment
you	fall	in	tune	with	existence	you	know	who	you	are.	When	the	within	and	the
without	 are	 meeting,	 merging,	 melting	 into	 each	 other,	 they	 create	 such	 an
explosion	of	light	that	everything	becomes	clear,	nothing	remains	unclear.	That's
the	moment	of	truth.
Many	have	sought,	very	 few	have	 found	because	 their	 search	was	wrong	from
the	very	beginning.	They	were	tired	of	life,	 they	were	antagonistic	to	life,	 they
were	failures	in	life,	they	were	miserable	people	--	and	they	started	seeking	and
searching	for	truth.
My	effort	here	is	first	to	teach	you	how	to	sing,	how	to	dance,	how	to	love	and
how	to	be	cheerful.	Once	that	has	started	happening	in	you,	once	the	process	is
triggered	and	you	become	like	a	child	--	innocent,	excited,	ecstatic	about	small
things...	 A	 butterfly	 is	 enough	 for	 the	 child	 to	 be	 in	 awe.	 When	 you	 are	 so
innocent	and	so	cheerful	and	so	full	of	wonder	then	the	first	step	has	been	taken,
and	taken	rightly.	Then	you	can	ride	on	the	wave	of	bliss	and	it	will	take	you	to
the	other	shore.
The	 seeker	 of	 truth	 is	 on	 a	 very	 negative	 journey.	 Truth	 cannot	 be	 sought
directly,	you	cannot	make	a	goal	out	of	it.	In	the	first	place	you	don't	know	what
it	is,	where	it	is,	so	how	can	you	make	a	goal	out	of	it?
Your	journey	will	remain	a	groping.	So	those	who	think	that	truth	can	be	attained
directly	start	from	the	very	beginning	in	a	wrong	way.	Their	truth	simply	means
something	that	they	have	learned	from	others.
They	have	already	concluded	what	is	true;	the	search	is	bogus.	They	are	simply
trying	to	prove	themselves	right.	They	are	not	on	a	real	journey	of	discovery.
The	real	 journey	has	 to	be	negative,	not	positive.	And	by	negative	I	mean	 that
you	have	to	see	your	lies.
You	don't	know	 truth,	 so	nothing	can	be	done	 for	 the	moment	about	 the	 truth.
You	cannot	seek	 it,	you	cannot	search	for	 it	 --	 the	question	does	not	arise.	But
you	know	many	lies	in	which	you	are	living,	in	which	everybody	is	living.	Our
society	teaches	us	so	many	lies.
The	god	that	has	been	taught	about	by	the	priest	is	a	lie.	The	heaven,	the	hell,	the
theory	of	karma,	rebirth	--	anything	that	has	been	taught	by	others	is	a	lie.	Truth
cannot	be	taught.	There	is	no	way	to	transfer	it.	One	can	experience	it	on	one's
own.	No	education	is	possible	about	truth,	but	you	can	be	he	helped	to	be	aware
of	what	kind	of	lies	you	are	living	in.	And	as	you	see	a	certain	lie,	it	drops.	The
moment	you	see	it,	it	drops,	you	cannot	hold	it	any	more.	In	your	seeing	that	it	is
a	lie,	it	becomes	impossible	to	go	on	living	through	it.
Slowly	slowly	more	and	more	lies	will	start	falling	like	dead	leaves	from	a	tree.
And	when	all	 the	dead	 leaves	have	 fallen,	new	 leaves	will	 arrive	of	 their	own
accord.	That's	how	truth	arrives:	you	destroy	the	lies	and	truth	comes,	you	negate
the	 lies	 and	 truth	 comes.	 It	 comes	 as	 a	 gift	 of	 god.	 You	 simply	 prepare	 the
ground,	you	simply	empty	yourself	of	all	kins	of	false	notion,	of	all	philosophies,
ideologies,	religions.	You	simply	go	on	emptying	yourself.	The	moment	you	are
totally	empty,	truth	descends	in	you.	It	is	not	your	achievement,	it	is	god's	gift.
(To	an	elderly	Dutchwoman):
The	truth	is	present	in	our	being,	but	only	as	a	seed,	only	as	a	potentiality.	It	has
to	be	actualised,	it	has	to	be	released.	It	is	not	somewhere	else,	one	need	not	go
anywhere,	 but	 one	 has	 to	 help	 the	 seed	 to	 become	 a	 sprout	 and	 the	 sprout	 to
become	 a	 tree	 and	 the	 tree	 to	 come	 to	 flowers	 and	 fruits.	 Then	 life	 is	 a
tremendous	experience,	so	full	of	joy	and	so	full	of	God	and	so	full	of	eternity.
Ordinarily	we	live	without	actualising	our	potential.
They	 say	 that	 ordinary	 people	 actualise	 only	 five	 to	 seven	 per	 cent	 of	 their
potential.	What	a	wastage!
Ninety-five	per	cent	of	your	life	was	available	to	you	but	you	never	lived	it.	It	is
as	if	somebody	was	given	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
palace	but	he	lived	only	in	the	porch	and	never	entered	the	palace.
We	are	living	like	beggars	for	the	simple	reason	that	we	don't	move	deeper	into
our	beings	to	actualise	all	that	has	been	given	to	us	as	a	gift	by	god.	But	we	don't
even	recognise	it,	we	don't	even	feel	that	there	is	something	more	to	life	than	we
are	 living.	Even	 the	greatest	 geniuses,	 people	 like	Albert	Einstein,	Rutherford,
Newton,	 Edison,	 even	 they	 don't	 actualise	 more	 than	 fifteen	 per	 cent	 of	 their
potential.	Only	once	in	a	while	is	there	a	Jesus	or	a	Buddha	who	actualises	one
hundred	 per	 cent	 of	 his	 potential.	 And	 these	 are	 the	 people	 who	 become	 the
proofs	that	God	is.
You	 can	 also	 become	 the	 proof	 because	 you	 have	 the	 same	 potential.	 The
difference	 is	 not	 in	 potential	 at	 all,	 the	 difference	 is	 that	 they	 have	 actualised
their	potential	and	our	potential	is	lying	dormant.
My	function	here	is	to	help	you	make	the	dormant	dynamic,	to	make	the	static
flowing,	 to	make	 the	 dead	 alive.	 It	 is	 possible.	 And	 it	 is	 not	 as	 difficult	 as	 it
appears	 in	 the	beginning.	 In	 the	beginning	 it	appears	difficult	only	because	we
have	 never	 tried	 it.	 So	 even	 small	 things...	 swimming	 is	 difficult	 because	 you
have	never	tried.	Even	seeing	a	person	riding	a	bicycle...	it	looks	impossible	to
the	person	who	does	not	know	how	to	ride	a	bicycle.	It	is	a	miracle.
Once	you	know	it	is	so	simple,	just	a	few	efforts	are	needed.	Maybe	you	will	fall
once	or	twice,	you	may	be	hurt	here	and	there...	a	few	bruises	here	and	there,	but
that	doesn't	matter.	That	happens	to	every	meditator:	a	few	hurts,	a	few	bruises	--
and	 sometimes	 a	 few	 fractures	 too.	 But	 that	 doesn't	 matter.	 Once	 you	 have
learned,	you	gain	so	much	that	the	price	you	pay	for	it	is	negligible.
And	it	is	never	too	late,	remember.	The	idea	is	prevalent	all	over	the	world	that
in	old	age	you	can't	do	much.	That	is	absolute	nonsense.	You	can	transform	you
potential	 any	 time.	 Even	 on	 one's	 deathbed,	 if	 one	 decides	 to	 change,	 the
transformation	is	possible.	Even	in	the	very	evening	of	our	life	it	 is	possible	to
come	back	home.
[There	follows	an	interview	with	Ma	Satya	Bharti,	which	is	not	included	here.]
One	 comes	 to	 discover	 both	 victory	 and	 immortality	 through	 meditation.
Without	meditation	we	are	part	of	time,	we	are	mortals,	death	is	awaiting	us	at
the	end.	And	all	that	we	are	doing	will	be	undone	by	death;	hence	we	are	simply
making	 sandcastles.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 certain	 that	 death	 will	 come	 and	 destroy
everything.	It	will	destroy	the	poor	man's	hut	and	it	will	destroy	the	king's	palace
-	they	are	all	the	same.	It	will	destroy	the	beggar	and	it	will	destroy	the	emperor.
It	makes	no	distinctions.
Without	 meditation	 we	 live	 in	 time	 and	 we	 are	 mortal.	 As	 you	 move	 into
meditation	you	start	moving	beyond	time.	You	start	entering	a	totally	new	kind
of	space	which	has	no	time	element	 in	 it.	 It	simply	is.	It	never	comes,	 it	never
goes.	Time	comes	and	goes.	It	is	a	movement,	a	procession	of	moments.
But	there	is	a	space	within	you	which	has	always	been	there,	is	there	right	now,
will	 be	 always	 there.	 It	 knows	 no	 change.	 It	 is	 beyond	 change.	That	which	 is
beyond	change	is	beyond	time.	This	means	change.
No	 change	 means	 no-time.	 And	 to	 experience	 that	 no-time	 is	 to	 experience
immortality.
Then	all	 fears	 fall	 away,	because	all	 fears	 are	 rooted	deep	down	 in	 the	 fear	of
death.	Then	all	anxiety	disappears,	because	there	is	really	only	one	anxiety.	All
other	anxieties	can	be	reduced	to	a	single	anxiety,	that	we	are	going	to	die,	that
everything	 we	 are	 doing	 is	 futile,	 that	 death	 is	 there	 and	 it	 can	 come	 at	 any
moment.	And	it	comes	without	informing	you,	there	is	no	way	to	protect	oneself
against	it	-	hence	great	anxiety,	trembling,	fear.
But	 once	 you	 know	 that	 something	 in	 you	 is	 beyond	 time,	 is	 beyond	 change,
then	you	know	that	something	in	you	that	is	beyond	death	too.	You	are	immortal,
you	were	never	born	and	you	will	never	die.
The	 moment	 you	 pass	 from	mind	 to	 meditation,	 you	 pass	 from	 the	 world	 of
mortals	into	the	world	of	the	immortals.	And	that	is	victory	-	not	the	victory	of
Alexander,	not	 the	victory	of	Napoleon,	but	 the	victory	of	Jesus,	 the	victory	of
Buddha.	That	is	true	victory.
It	 is	only	through	meditation	that	 life	becomes	meaningful.	Without	meditation
life	 is	 utterly	 meaningless.	 One	 only	 vegetates,	 one	 does	 not	 really	 live.	 One
hopes	to	live,	but	that	hope	is	never	fulfilled.
One	goes	on	postponing	life	for	tomorrow	-	and	tomorrow	never	comes.
You	can	see	that	meaninglessness	written	on	people's	faces	everywhere.	People
are	trying	to	create	some	kind	of	meaning	in	their	lives,	but	a	created	meaning	is
going	to	be	arbitrary	and	you	know	all	the	time	that	it	is	just	your	creation,	it	is
not	worth	much,	and	deep	down	you	remain	hollow.	Afraid	of	that	hollowness,
people	keep	 themselves	occupied	with	every	kind	of	activity.	All	 the	 time	 that
they	are	awake,	they	are	engaged.	They	are	afraid	that	if	they	are	not	engaged	in
something	they	may	have	to	face	their	own	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
meaninglessness,	 their	 own	 emptiness,	 and	 futility.	 And	 that	 is	 frightening,	 it
scares	them;	hence	they	never	look	in.	For	the	whole	day	they	are	occupied,	and
then	they	fall	asleep	and	still	they	remain	occupied	in	their	dreams.
Meditation	 means	 facing	 your	 inner	 emptiness.	 Howsoever	 it	 hurts	 in	 the
beginning	 it	 has	 to	 be	 encountered,	 because	 in	 encountering	 it	 you	 will	 be
surprised	that	it	is	just	a	curtain.	Behind	it	is	very	dark	when	you	go	in,	but	that
darkness	 is	 only	 on	 the	 circumference.	 At	 the	 very	 center	 of	 it	 there	 is	 light,
eternal	light.
And	 once	 a	 person	 has	 experienced	 his	 own	 light,	 his	 own	 being,	 his	 own
eternity,	all	meaninglessness	disappears.	One	becomes	praiseworthy.
It	is	only	through	meditation	that	one	becomes	praise-worthy.
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	Bliss
4	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002045
ShortTitle:	WITHME04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Money	is	not	your	goal,	power	is	not	your	goal,	God	is	not	your	goal,	truth	is	not
your	goal.	These	are	different	names	which	you	go	on	giving	to	bliss.
All	these	names	have	to	be	removed	so	that	you	can	face	the	ultimate	goal	in	its
sheer	nakedness.	Once	you	know	the	goal,	immediately	you	know	the	path.
Once	you	recognise	that	bliss	is	our	goal,	you	need	not	go	outside	at	all,	because
bliss	is	our	very	nature.
Happiness	 can	 exist	 on	may	 planes.	 The	 lowest	 is	 pleasure	 and	 the	 highest	 is
bliss,	and	there	are	many	stages	in	between.
Man	ordinarily	lives	at	the	lowest,	that's	why	people	go	on	seeking	pleasure.	It	is
a	physical	phenomenon.	Sex	and	food	are	their	obsessions.	Nothing	is	wrong	in
enjoying	 food	 or	 sex,	 but	 when	 they	 become	 obsessions	 then	 you	 are
pathological.	One	has	to	go	beyond	the	physical	plane	of	being.
Food	and	sex	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	Food	keeps	the	individual	alive	and
sex	 keeps	 the	 species	 alive.	Without	 food	 the	 individual	will	 die,	without	 sex
humanity	will	disappear.	Deep	down	the	function	of	both	is	the	same.	That's	why
it	 often	 happens	 that	 a	 person	 who	 starts	 repressing	 sexuality	 becomes	 more
obsessed	with	 food.	His	whole	energy	starts	moving	 towards	 food.	The	person
who	 starts	 controlling	 his	 food,	 who	 starts	 dieting,	 becomes	 more	 and	 more
obsessed	with	sex.
One	has	to	understand	these	energy	phenomena,	because	only	by	understanding
is	there	a	transcendence.
The	second	plane	can	be	called	psychological.	Hearing	beautiful	music...	it	is	a
subtle	kind	of	nourishment.	 It	 revives	 the	spirit,	 it	 thrills	you	but	 in	some	very
invisible	way.	It	is	not	measurable,	it	cannot	be	detected	by	scientific	instruments
but	something	happens.	It	is	not	objective,	so	nobody	else	can	see	it.	It	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	subjective.
The	first	plane	is	objective.	Sex	can	be	seen	by	others.	Hence	for	centuries	every
effort	has	been	made	to	hide	it,	not	to	do	it	before	others...	not	only	not	to	do	it
before	others,	not	to	do	it	even	before	yourself:	so	do	it	in	darkness.
The	reason	is	that	it	is	an	objective	phenomenon.	Hence	people	are	so	interested
in	pornography	--
because	sex	is	transformed	into	absolute	objectivity:	it	is	marketable,	it	becomes
a	commodity.	So	is	the	case	with	food.
But	with	music,	with	the	joy	derived	from	poetry	or	the	joy	felt	when	you	are	in
close	proximity	to	nature,	just	in	seeing	a	beautiful	sunset	something	of	immense
value	happens.	You	feel	thrilled,	uplifted.
That	is	happiness.	It	is	beyond	pleasure.
If	one	remains	on	the	first	plane	one	remains	an	animal.	Only	with	the	second	is
the	human	being	born.
But	humanity	 is	only	a	bridge,	one	has	 to	 transcend	even	 that.	One	should	not
make	one's	house	on	the	bridge.	One	has	to	go	beyond	the	joy	of	music,	beauty,
poetry,	painting,	creativity.
Then	the	 third	plane,	 the	highest	opens	up.	The	first	 is	objective,	 the	second	is
subjective;	the	third	is	beyond	duality,	it	is	neither	subjective	nor	objective.	One
is	 simply	 a	witness,	 all	 duality	 has	 been	 left	 behind.	 The	 first	 is	 physical,	 the
second	is	psychology,	the	third	is	spiritual.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	body	or
the	mind.	In	fact	when	you	go	beyond-mind,	when	you	see	that	you	are	neither
the	 body	 nor	 the	 mind	 then	 you	 start	 entering	 into	 the	 third.	 Then	 happiness
becomes	bliss.	And	that	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
Bliss	is	a	state	of	awareness,	watchfulness,	meditativeness,	of	profound	silence,
peace.	Nothing	stirs	 in	you,	all	 is	quiet,	and	you	are	absolutely	relaxed.	Out	of
that	 relaxation	something	bursts	 forth	at	you	very	center,	some	energy	 that	has
always	 remained	 there	 starts	 flowing,	 becomes	 dynamic.	 It	 has	 been	 dormant
because	you	were	never	 looking	 at	 it.	You	never	paid	 any	 attention,	 you	were
concerned	with	 the	 body	 and	 the	mind.	Now,	 you	have	 turned	 in.	Your	whole
concern,	 your	 whole	 attention,	 has	 settled	 at	 the	 center.	 You	 have	 left	 the
circumference	far	behind.
When	the	energy	is	absolutely	centered,	at	the	center,	bliss	happens.	Happiness
has	to	move	from	pleasure	to	bliss.
Bliss	is	always	perfect.	You	can't	have	imperfect	bliss,	it	is	impossible.	It	is	like
you	cannot	have	an	imperfect	circle:	if	it	is	imperfect	it	is	not	a	circle.	If	it	is	a
circle	it	has	to	be	perfect.	Precisely	like	that,	bliss	is	always	perfect;	perfection	is
intrinsic	 to	 it,	 not	 accidental.	 So	 you	 cannot	 find	 bliss	 in	 any	 other	 form	 than
perfection.
If	bliss	is	not	perfect	that	means	that	what	you	are	thinking	is	bliss	is	something
else.	It	may	be	happiness,	pleasure,	but	it	is	not	bliss.
Pleasure	is	momentary	and	it	is	always	imperfect.	Happiness	is	a	little	better	than
pleasure	because	pleasure	is	more	body-oriented	and	happiness	is	more	psyche-
oriented:	a	little	higher,	just	in	the	middle.	On	one	side,	one	extreme	is	pleasure,
at	the	other	extreme	is	bliss.	In	the	middle	is	happiness.
Move	from	pleasure	to	happiness	to	bliss.	That	is	the	whole	path	of	a	sannyasin.
I	don't	want	you	to	deny	anything,	but	I	also	want	you	to	remember	that	life	is
fulfilled	only	when	you	have	attained	to	bliss.
Don't	get	lost	in	the	world	of	pleasures	and	happiness.	Nothing	is	wrong	in	them,
enjoy	then	on	the	way	just	as	when	you	go	for	a	walk	you	enjoy	the	birds	singing
on	the	way,	the	trees,	the	flowers.	But	you	don't	become	attached	to	any	tree,	you
go	on	moving.
Enjoy	all	that	is	available	but	go	on	moving	till	you	have	arrived	to	such	a	peace
that	is	undisturbable,	at	such	a	bliss	that	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.	Till	you
have	arrived	home	go	on	seeking	and	searching.
Enjoy	 everything	 but	 don't	 be	 obsessed	 by	 anything.	 Remain	 normal,	 enjoy
eating,	meeting	people,	seeing	all	that	the	world	makes	available	--	I	am	not	in
favour	 of	 escapism	 --	 but	 continue	 to	 remember	 that	 this	 is	 only	 an	 overnight
stay.	In	the	morning	we	have	to	move.	This	is	only	a	caravanserai,	it	is	not	home.
If	this	much	remembrance	is	there,	one	goes	on	moving	and	on	moving,	and	one
day	the	miracle	happens:	perfect	bliss	has	descended	upon	you.	Then	there	is	no
misery	any	more,	no	possibility	of	falling	back.
It	 happens	 only	 in	 perfect	 awareness,	 in	 perfect	 meditativeness,	 in	 perfect
silence.
Happiness	is	finite,	it	begins	and	ends;	hence	it	has	no	ultimate	value.	It	is	a	toy.
You	can	remain	occupied	with	it	for	a	moment,	it	brings	a	little	sensation,	a	little
thrill	 into	 life,	 but	 then	 in	 its	 wake	 it	 also	 brings	 frustration	 in	 the	 same
proportion.	 Because	 when	 it	 ends,	 and	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 end,	 it	 leaves	 you	 in
darkness.	So	each	happiness	is	a	costly	affair.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	bliss	is	totally	different.	It	has	no	beginning,	no	end.	It	is	always	there	inside
you,	it	is	something	with	which	you	are	born.	To	express	it	right,	it	is	you;	hence
it	can	neither	be	taken	away	from	you,	nor	can	it	be	given	to	you.
But	the	question	arises:	if	bliss	is	your	nature	why	are	people	in	misery?	People
are	in	misery	because	they	never	look	into	their	nature.	Their	eyes	are	focussed
outwards	 on	 far-away	 things.	 They	 have	 forgotten	 how	 to	 look	 in,	 they	 have
forgotten	the	very	process	of	turning	in.
Meditation	is	nothing	but	the	simple	process	of	turning	in.	Meditation	does	not
produce	bliss,	it	simply	helps	you	to	recognise	what	is	already	there.	It	does	not
give	you	anything	new,	it	simply	reveals	the	ancient	most	thing	in	you.
Bliss	is	 the	only	rock	that	 time	cannot	destroy.	Everything	else	is	destroyed	by
time,	sooner	or	later.
Only	bliss	remains	untouched	by	time	because	bliss	is	beyond	time.	Time	is	part
of	 mind.	 In	 fact	 time	 and	 mind	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 coin.	 Time	 is	 a
psychological	 phenomenon.	You	 can	watch	 it	 in	 your	 own	 life:	when	 you	 are
miserable	 time	becomes	 longer,	 then	one	hour	 seems	 to	be	 so	 long.	 If	you	are
sitting	by	the	bedside	of	a	dying	man	then	the	night	seems	so	long,	as	if	there	is
never	going	to	be	an	end	to	it.	But	if	you	are	holding	the	hand	of	your	beloved
time	passes	so	fast,	so	quickly,	that	hours	pass	and	you	think	only	minutes	have
passed,	or	not	even	minutes.	The	night	passes	as	if	the	clock	has	been	deceiving
you	and	going	faster.
When	 you	 are	 happy	 time	 goes	 quickly.	When	 you	 are	 miserable	 time	 slows
down.	So	time	is	something	psychological.	And	when	you	are	neither	miserable
nor	happy,	just	silent	and	peaceful,	time	disappears,	time	is	no	more	found.
An	ancient	Sufi	parable	says	that	when	Jesus	was	departing	one	of	his	disciples
asked	him	"Lord,	what	will	be	the	most	unique	thing	in	the	kingdom	of	God?"
And	Jesus	said,	"There	shall	be	time	no	longer."
It	 is	not	 recorded	 in	 the	Christian	gospels	but	Sufis	have	carried	 this	beautiful
anecdote.	It	is	of	tremendous	significance.	The	most	important	thing	he	says	is:
There	shall	be	time	no	longer.
It	can	be	translated	as:	There	shall	be	mind	no	longer,	there	will	be	no	pleasure,
no	pain,	there	will	be	no	experience	as	such,	just	silence,	pure	silence.
Every	experience	is	a	disturbance.	Even	the	pleasant	experience	is	a	disturbance;
hence	 it	 is	 tiring.	 Even	 pleasure	 tires	 people.	 In	 fact	 it	 tires	 more	 than	 pain,
because	with	pain	you	keep	a	little	distance.	You	don't	want	it,	you	want	it	to	be
finished	soon.	You	remain	a	little	aloof,	detached,	you	don't	cling	to	it.	But	you
cling	to	pleasure	and	you	want	more	and	more	of	it;	hence	it	is	more	tiring.	And
you	can	 see	 it:	 rich	people	 look	more	 tired	 than	poor	people,	kings	 look	more
tired	 than	 beggars,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 beggars	 can	 only	 hope	 and
dream	about	pleasures,	and	when	you	hope	and	dream	it	is	not	tiring.	In	fact	it
infuses	new	vitality	in	you.	When	you	are	just	dreaming	and	hoping	it	is	always
a	transfusion	of	new	blood.
But	the	rich,	the	affluent,	the	kings	--	they	are	living	it,	and	it	is	boring	and	it	has
become	 tasteless.	They	are	utterly	 tired	but	 they	don't	know	where	 to	go	now.
There	 is	 nowhere	 to	 go,	 no	 exit.	 That's	 how	 Jean-Paul	 Sartre	 defines	 hell:	No
exit.
Whenever	he	is	in	a	situation	from	where	there	is	no	exit,	the	man	who	is	in	pain
can	think	of	pleasure.
There	 is	 an	 exit,	 at	 least	 in	 his	 imagination.	 But	 the	man	who	 is	 in	 pleasure,
where	can	he	go?	Not	even	in	his	 imagination...	To	pain	he	cannot	go;	nobody
wants	 to	 be	 in	 a	 painful	 state.	 And	 pleasure	 he	 has	 already	 got,	 so	 he	 has
nowhere	to	go.	He	is	stuck.	That	is	hell.
The	old	idea	of	hell	is	really	out	of	date,	that	people	will	be	tortured	and	burned
and...	It	is	a	Nazi	idea,	a	Fascist	idea.	But	it	is	wrong	because	if	there	is	so	much
pain	 people	will	 be	 happy.	They	will	 be	 hoping	 that	 sooner	 or	 later	 it	will	 be
finished.
I	 would	 like	 hell	 to	 be	 like	 the	 heaven	 that	 is	 depicted	 in	 the	 scriptures:	 all
pleasures	available,	everybody	suffering	from	diabetes!	(laughter)	Everybody	so
fat	 that	 they	 cannot	 walk,	 and	 refrigerators	 go	 on	 moving	 behind	 everybody!
(laughter)	Wherever	 you	go	 the	 refrigerator	 goes	with	 you,	 you	 cannot	 escape
from	it.	All	kinds	of	pleasures	are	available	and	there	is	no	exit.	That	would	be
real	hell.
The	 people	 who	 depicted	 hell	 did	 not	 have	 much	 imagination.	 They	 did	 not
understand	much	human	psychology.
There	 is	 only	 one	 thing	 which	 is	 beyond	 heaven	 and	 hell,	 beyond	 pain	 and
pleasure	--	that	is	bliss.	By	bliss	I	don't	mean	joy,	I	don't	mean	happiness,	not	at
all	--	but	peace,	total	peace,	an	undisturbed	silence.
One	is	so	centred	in	oneself	that	there	is	no	time,	no	mind.	Each	moment	is	all.
That	is	the	only	permanent	thing	in	existence	--	eternal,	rocklike.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Bliss	 happens	 only	 to	 those	 few	blessed	 souls	who	 know	how	 to	 be	 peaceful.
Ordinarily	 man	 lives	 in	 a	 great	 turmoil.	 He	 lives	 constantly	 surrounded	 by	 a
crowd	 of	 thoughts,	 desires,	 memories,	 imagination,	 expectations.	 He	 is	 never
alone,	 these	 people	 go	 on	 following	 him.	 Even	 if	 he	 goes	 to	 a	 cave	 in	 the
mountains	these	people	are	there.	He	is	always	surrounded	by	these	ugly	faces;
hence	there	is	no	peace.
They	 all	 go	 on	 pulling	 you	 apart,	 they	 are	 all	 pulling	 you	 into	 different
directions.
Your	anger	wants	to	do	one	thing,	your	greed	wants	to	do	something	else,	your
ambition	forces	you	to	do	something	exactly	opposite	to	what	your	anger	wants
to	do	--	and	you	are	divided.	You	are	not	integrated.
Peace	means	 that	 one	 is	 integrated.	All	 these	 fragments	 have	melted	 into	 one
being.	 There	 is	 no	 crowd	 any	more.	One	 is	 alone,	 utterly	 alone.	A	 deep	 deep
peace	prevails	inside.	Then	one	is	ready	to	receive	bliss.
Bliss	 follows	 peace.	 Peace	 prepares	 the	 ground,	 one	 peace	 is	 there	 bliss	 is
inevitable.
Bliss	 happens	 only	 to	 those	 what	 loyalty	 is.	 Bliss	 happens	 only	 in	 the	 heart,
never	in	the	head.	The	head	is	like	a	desert:	nothing	grows	there.	It	is	only	in	the
heart	that	everything	that	is	of	any	value,	any	eternal	value,	grows	in	the	heart.
But	the	functioning	of	the	heart	and	the	head	are	totally	opposed	to	each	other.
And	we	are	trained	for	the	head	--	that	becomes	a	problem.
The	head	is	based	on	doubt	nd	the	heart	is	based	on	trust.	Our	whole	training	is
of	 doubting,	 thinking,	 suspecting,	 questioning.	And	 that	 is	 not	 the	way	 of	 the
heart;	hence	we	remain	hung-up	in	the	head.	There	are	very	few	people	on	the
earth	who	know	 that	 the	 heart	 exists.	 For	 others	 it	 is	 only	 a	metaphor,	 poetry,
fiction,	not	fact;	at	the	most	just	a	jumping	mechanism	for	the	blood.	But	that	is
not	the	heart	that	mystics	have	been	talking	about.
There	 is	 a	 center	 deep	 down	 inside	 you,	 but	 that	 center	 can	 only	 be	 known
through	trust.
Sannyas	is	a	jump	into	trust.	It	is	getting	involved	in	a	love	affair,	a	love	affair
with	God	himself.	Less	than	that	is	of	no	use.	Only	a	love	affair	can	help.
The	head	will	say	that	this	is	blind	trust	and	it	will	condemn	it	in	every	possible
way.	But	 don't	 listen	 to	 the	head;	 it	 is	 the	devil	who	 speaks	 through	 the	head.
Listen	to	the	heart	--	that	is	God's	voice.
Jos	 is	 a	 form	 of	 Joseph,	 the	 name	 of	 the	 father	 of	 Jesus.	 Literally	 it	 means
increasing	faithfulness.
Bliss	is	possible	only	if	you	trust.	It	is	not	possible	in	a	state	of	doubt.	It	never
happens	to	the	sceptical	mind.	In	fact	it	never	happens	to	any	mind	because	more
or	 less	 all	 minds	 are	 sceptical.	 It	 happens	 to	 the	 heart.	 The	 heart	 is	 always
trusting,	 it	 is	 always	 faithful.	 It	 knows	 how	 to	 love,	 it	 knows	 how	 to	 be
committed	to	love.
The	mind	is	a	coward;	hence	it	cannot	trust.	It	is	suspicious,	it	is	always	afraid;
out	of	fear	it	doubts.
Fear	and	doubt	go	together,	trust	and	love	go	together.	Doubt	is	not	something	to
brag	 about.	 People	 brag	 about	 their	 doubting	 minds,	 they	 think	 that	 they	 are
doing	something	great.	They	even	think	that	they	are	very	brave,	that's	why	they
can	doubt.	But	doubt	is	rooted	in	cowardliness.	To	trust	more	guts	are	needed.
To	trust	 it	 really	needs	great	boldness.	Trust	 is	a	sacrifice:	sacrifice	of	 the	ego,
sacrifice	of	fear,	sacrifice	of	doubt,	sacrifice	of	the	head.	But	once	one	has	been
capable	of	doing	this	miracle,	of	moving	from	doubt	to	trust,	from	head	to	heart,
from	 logic	 to	 love,	 then	 all	 kind	 of	 miracles	 become	 possible.	 Then	 you	 are
entitled	to	incredible	experiences.
It	 is	symbolic	 that	Jesus	is	born	to	Joseph,	 that	Joseph	is	 the	father	of	Jesus.	It
can	be	translated	into	a	beautiful	symbol:	enlightenment	is	born	out	of	trust,	trust
is	the	father	of	enlightenment.
There	 are	 things	which	man	 can	 do	 and	 there	 are	 things	which	man	 can	 only
allow	to	happen.	Bliss	belongs	to	the	second	category.	You	cannot	do	it	but	you
can	allow	it	to	happen,	you	can	be	available	to	it,	you	can	be	open	to	it.	All	that
is	 needed	 on	 your	 side	 is	 a	 deep	 trust,	 receptivity,	 love,	 surrender,	 let-go,	 and
then	it	immediately	starts	happening.	It	is	never	your	doing,	it	can	never	be	your
doing.	Even	when	it	 is	happening,	if	you	start	doing	something	about	it,	 it	will
stop	happening.	Doing	means	undoing.
All	 that	 is	 great	 in	 life	 belongs	 to	 the	 second	 category.	 The	 first	 category	 is
mundane,	the	second	category	is	sacred.	Bliss,	love,	truth,	God,	freedom	--	they
all	happen.	You	cannot	do	anything,	you	are	 the	barrier.	When	you	are	absent,
when	 the	 ego	 is	 no	more	 functioning,	 the	heavens	open	 and	 start	 pouring	 into
you	tremendous	treasures	of	joy,	inexhaustible	treasures	of	truth.	But	it	is	always
a	gift	from	God.	You	cannot	claim	it	as	your	doing.	One	can	only	be	grateful.
Bliss	 is	our	potential	but	unless	we	work	hard	 the	potential	 can	never	become
actual.	It	can't	become	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
actual	by	itself.	It	needs	tremendous	effort	on	our	part	to	transform	it	from	a	seed
into	a	tree,	into	flowers,	into	fruits.
The	potential	is	like	frozen	ice:	through	hard	work	you	can	create	the	necessary
heat	to	melt	it.	And	once	the	ice	starts	melting	your	coldness	starts	disappearing
and	love	arises.	The	more	you	flow,	the	more	loving	you	are;	the	more	you	flow,
the	more	close	you	are	to	god,	because	once	you	start	flowing	the	ocean	is	not
far	away.	Howsoever	far	away	it	may	be,	it	is	not	far	away.	But	if	one	is	ice-cold,
frozen,	 the	ocean	may	be	just	by	the	corner	and	the	difference	is	unbridgeable;
the	ice	cannot	move,	it	is	stagnant.	It	has	to	be	melted.
And	we	have	to	create	the	necessary	heat	to	melt	it.	A	sturdy	spirit	is	needed.
People	start...	many	people	start	meditating,	working	on	themselves,	but	they	are
not	sturdy.	One	day	they	will	meditate	and	then	another	day	they	will	sleep;	for	a
few	days	they	will	work	and	then	they	will	completely	forget	about	it.	And	they
go	astray	very	easily,	any	accidental	thing	can	take	them	away	from	their	work.
Great	persistence	is	needed,	perseverance	is	needed,	patience	is	needed.	And	one
has	to	go	on	and	on	hammering.
It	is	like	digging	a	well.	You	go	on	digging.	You	will	not	reach	the	water	level
immediately	although	the	water	is	there.	But	between	you	and	the	water	there	are
many	layers	of	earth,	maybe	rocks	took	and	they	all	have	to	be	removed.	And	it
needs	work.
Starting	 at	 one	 place	 and	 stopping	 then	 starting	 at	 another	 place	 and	 then
stopping,	then	starting	at	a	third	place	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	time.	It	is	better	to
work	in	a	single	direction	with	your	total	being,	with	your	whole	heart.	Then	the
potential	 certainly	 becomes	 actual,	 and	when	 the	 potential	 is	 actualised	 life	 is
fulfilled.	Then	for	the	first	time	you	know	that	there	is	great	meaning.
The	other	name	for	that	meaning	is	God.
Bliss	is	the	beloved	of	all.	Whatsoever	we	are	doing,	we	are	searching	for	bliss.
In	every	act,	right	or	wrong,	moral	or	immoral,	material	or	spiritual,	the	search	is
the	same:	the	search	for	the	ultimate	beloved.
And	that	is	bliss.
If	 one	 searches	 for	 bliss	 unconsciously	 one	 cannot	 find	 it.	 That's	 how	 many
people	go	on	searching	and	searching,	and	they	always	find	only	misery.	And	the
more	 they	 reach,	 the	more	miserable	 they	become.	But	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 their
search	 is	unconscious.	They	have	not	yet	become	alert	 to	what	 they	are	 really
seeking	and	searching	for.
The	moment	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 bliss	 is	 our	 goal,	 things	 become	 simple.
God	is	not	your	goal,	truth	is	not	your	goal.	These	are	different	names	which	you
go	on	giving	to	bliss.	All	these	names	have	to	be	removed	so	that	you	can	face
the	ultimate	goal	in	its	sheer	nakedness,	because	once	you	know	what	the	goal	is
things	become	simple.	Once	you	know	the	goal,	immediately	you	know	the	path;
once	you	recognise	that	bliss	is	our	goal	you	need	not	go	outside	at	all	because
bliss	is	our	very	nature.	The	way	is	in,	not	out.	You	have	not	to	rush	and	run	for
it.	You	have	to	be	more	still	and	more	silent.
And	the	moment	that	you	are	totally	still	and	silent	it	wells	up	within	you	being.
That	 moment	 is	 moment	 when	 one	 is	 really	 born.	 Before	 that	 one	 is	 only
physiologically	born,	not	spiritually.	One	is	not	a	soul	before	that.	Only	after	that
does	one	become	a	soul,	does	one	become	an	immortal,	does	one	become	a	god.
Bliss	 is	 the	ultimate	 state	of	 flowering,	when	you	become	a	 flower,	when	you
have	 realised	 your	 total	 potential.	 Bliss	 is	 the	 reward	 for	 growing	 to	 one's
ultimate	 height.	When	 you	 reach	 the	 sunlit	 peaks	 of	 your	 consciousness	 then
only	do	you	know	what	bliss	it.
To	 be	watchful	 is	 the	way	 to	 attain	 bliss.	 That's	what	meditation	 is	 all	 about:
being	watchful,	alert,	aware,	being	watchful	of	what	you	do,	being	watchful	of
what	you	thing,	being	watchful	of	what	you	feel.
These	are	the	three	watchfulnesses,	and	if	you	can	do	these	three	then	the	forth
arises	in	you:	you	become	watchful	of	who	you	are.
Start	 by	 action	 because	 that	 is	 the	 grossest	 thing,	 visible,	 tangible,	 objective.
Then	move	to	thoughts.
They	are	a	little	less	gross,	invisible	to	others,	only	visible	to	you.	Then	move	to
feeling,	 which	 is	 even	more	 subtle,	more	 vague.	 Even	 to	 you	 it	 is	 not	 totally
visible,	only	vaguely	available.
If	these	three	watchfulnesses	can	be	fulfilled	the	fourth	arises	in	you.	Then	you
know	 who	 you	 are.	 Then	 you	 settle	 in	 your	 being.	 And	 to	 be	 absolutely
unidentified	with	the	body,	mind	and	heart	is	the	ultimate	peak.	Suddenly	there	is
a	showering	of	bliss.	From	all	directions	it	starts	showering	on	you,	and	then	it
goes	on	showering	forever.
Anand	means	bliss;	Adriana	means	creative	heart	--	a	blissful	and	creative	heart.
That's	the	whole	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
definition	of	sannyas.
Bliss	is	always	creative,	it	can't	be	otherwise.	And	if	the	person	who	is	creative
is	not	blissful	than	all	his	creativity	is	bogus.	He	may	be	a	compositor	but	not	a
creator.	He	may	be	putting	things	together	in	beautiful	ways,	he	may	know	the
art	of	painting,	but	he	can't	be	a	creative	artist.	He	knows	the	technique,	the	how-
to,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 a	 creative	 artist.	He	may	 know	how	 to	 dance	 but	 he	 is	 not	 a
dancer.
The	dancer	 is	one	who	 loses	himself	 in	his	dance	and	disappears	 in	 the	dance.
The	real	dancer,	sooner	or	later	forgets	the	technique,	forgets	the	art;	it	becomes
his	life.
In	Zen	they	say	that	if	you	really	want	to	be	a	painter,	for	twelve	years	learn	how
to	paint	and	then	for	twelve	years	forget	all	about	painting,	never	touch	the	brush
and	never	paint	again.	And	after	twelve	years	--
that	means	after	twenty-four	years,	twelve	years	of	painting	and	twelve	years	of
silence	--	start	painting	again.	Now	you	have	forgotten	the	technique,	now	you
can	be	a	painter.	Now	something	can	start	moving	from	your	very	heart.
Bliss	and	creativity	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	There	are	people	who	have
been	 trying	 to	 be	 blissful	 without	 being	 creative	 and	 all	 have	 failed.	 All	 the
monks	and	the	nuns	of	the	world	have	failed	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	were
trying	 something	 impossible.	 They	 were	 trying	 to	 be	 blissful	 without	 being
creative.	And	being	creative	is	an	absolutely	necessary	part	of	it,	an	intrinsic	part
of	bliss.	You	cannot	drop	it.
The	 same	 has	 happened	 to	 many	 artists,	 painters,	 musicians,	 dancers,	 poets.
They	 had	 been	 trying	 to	 be	 creative	 without	 being	 blissful.	 And	 if	 you	 are
miserable,	what	are	you	going	to	create?	Your	heart	is	dead!
You	are	so	burdened,	you	are	carrying	Himalayas	of	misery.	How	can	you	sing?
How	can	you	paint?	Your	painting	will	simply	be	a	catharsis.
That's	what	Picasso's	paintings	are,	a	catharsis.	They	helped	him	to	unburden	his
misery,	his	insanity.	If	he	were	stopped	and	where	not	allowed	to	paint	he	would
go	insane.	It	is	therapy	through	art	but	it	is	not	creativity.
And	exactly	is	the	case	with	many	poets,	musicians,	dancers	and	other	kinds	of
artist.	 They	 are	 trying	 to	 be	 creative	 but	 they	 have	 nothing	 to	 share.	They	 are
almost	 dead,	 dull,	 unconscious,	 in	 such	 an	 inner	 turmoil	 and	 tension	 that
whatsoever	they	create	will	reflect	their	pathology.	The	whole	of	contemporary
art	is	pathological.
The	monks	and	nuns	failed	because	they	were	trying	to	do	one	thing,	trying	to	be
blissful	without	being	creative.	And	the	arts	have	failed	because	they	have	been
trying	just	the	opposite,	being	creative	without	being	blissful.
My	effort	here	is	to	create	a	new	kind	of	man.	My	sannyasins	have	to	be	creative
and	blissful	together	because	that's	the	only	possible	way	to	grow,	to	mature,	to
be.	So	remember	it:	be	blissful	and	creative.	And	if	you	are	blissful	it	is	easy	to
be	creative;	if	you	are	creative	it	is	easy	to	be	blissful.	They	help	each	other,	they
go	on	helping	each	other.
The	highest	peak	is	attained	when	both	are	fulfilled.	One	can	call	that	state	God,
Nirvana,	enlightenment	or	whatsoever	one	wants	to	call	it...	the	kingdom	of	God,
moksha,	ultimate	freedom.	But	it	comes	only	to	those	few	people	who	are	trying
both,	who	are	creating	a	synthesis	between	bliss	and	creativity.
Hardy	means	strong	and	brave.
Bliss	needs	both	qualities.	Cowards	cannot	be	blissful	because	cowards	cannot
be	 individuals.	 They	 remain	 part	 of	 the	 crowd	 --	 and	 the	 crowd	 is	 insane,	 the
crowd	 is	 a	 mess.	 The	 coward	 cannot	 be	 alone,	 he	 is	 so	 scared	 of	 being	 left
behind.	 He	 always	 wants	 to	 follow	 the	 crowd.	 He	 feels	 good	 when	 he	 is
surrounded	by	people,	he	feels	as	if	he	is	safe,	secure.	And	of	course	the	crows	is
miserable	and	 it	expects	you	 too	 to	be	miserable.	 If	you	are	blissful	 the	crowd
thinks	that	you	are	mad,	something	is	wrong	with	you.
One	 needs	 courage	 to	 get	 out	 of	 the	 structures	 that	 society	 imposes	 on
everybody.	One	needs	to	be	brave,	to	resist	every	kind	of	slavery,	because	only
when	you	are	utterly	free	of	all	slavery,	all	social	conditioning,	does	your	inner
being	start	dancing.	 In	 freedom	is	dance,	 in	 freedom	is	bliss	and	 in	 freedom	is
God.
A	slave	cannot	know	anything	of	value.
Bliss	is	naturally	luminous.	You	cannot	hide	it.	It	is	bound	to	explode,	it	is	bound
to	reach	others.	It	is	like	the	fragrance	of	a	flower.	The	flower	cannot	contain	it,
the	winds	are	going	to	 take	it	away,	far	far	away.	It	 is	 like	a	 lamp.	You	cannot
hide	it,	it	shines	forth.	Even	from	very	far	away	you	can	see	it	in	the	dark	night	--
just	a	small	lamp,	a	candle.	And	bliss	is	a	light,	a	flame.	It	is	your	heart	aflame.
When	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
heart	has	become	a	divine	flame	you	feel	bliss.
Nobody	 has	 ever	 been	 able	 to	 hide	 it,	 it	 shines	 forth.	 It	 is	 very	 bright,	 it	 is
dazzling	 bright,	 in	 fact	 it	 is	 offensively	 bright,	 hence	 Jesus	 offends	 people,
Buddha	offends	people.	Not	that	they	ever	want	to	offend	anybody,	they	are	the
humblest	 people	 possible,	 but	 nothing	 can	 be	 done	 about	 it.	 Their	 light	 is	 so
dazzling,	their	love	is	such	a	perfume	that	it	penetrates	to	the	very	core	of	other's
people's	being.	Their	 joy	is	such	that	everybody	feels	 inferior.	They	don't	want
anybody	to	feel	inferior,	in	fact	they	declare	"you	are	just	as	we	are,	we	are	not
different.	That	is	their	whole	message.	Whatsoever	they	say	is	one	thing,	but	still
their	very	presence	 is	enough	 for	people	 to	 feel	offended.	They	shrink	 in	 their
inferiority,	and	out	of	that	inferiority	revenge	arises;	hence	Socrates	is	poisoned,
Buddha	 is	 stoned,	Jesus	 is	killed.	These	are,	 in	a	way,	natural	causes	of	death,
these	are	not	accidents.	They	were	bound	to	happen.
The	simple	reason	is	that	whenever	your	heart	is	full	of	bliss	you	become	open,
all	windows	and	doors	open	up,	and	your	light	and	your	bliss	and	your	presence
starts	reaching	people.	Those	who	understand	will	be	healed	by	it,	but	there	are
very	few	people	who	will	understand	it.	Those	who	don't	understand	will	be	hurt
by	it	--	and	they	are	in	millions.
Hence	the	greatest	risk	in	the	world	is	to	be	blissful.	The	world	loves	miserable
people,	it	respects	them	tremendously.	Whenever	somebody	is	utterly	miserable
it	 calls	 it	 holiness.	 It	 worships	 and	 respects	 miserable	 people	 as	 saints	 and
mahatmas.	The	more	 they	 torture	 themselves,	 the	more	 the	people	 fall	 at	 their
feet.	But	the	world	has	never	loved	a	man	who	is	really	blissful.	The	miserable
person	suits	the	miserable	world	perfectly	well.	They	are	on	the	same	plane,	they
fit	together,	they	hum	together.
The	blissful	person	becomes	such	a	peak,	he	rises	so	high	above	the	clouds,	that
we	start	feeling	insulted.	The	only	way	is	either	to	rise	to	the	same	height	or	to
destroy	that	peak	so	that	you	can	be	at	ease	again,	so	that	you	can	be	at	ease	with
the	pygmy	crowd,	with	the	miserable	lot.
Mind	is	a	state	of	darkness,	but	one	can	rise	above	the	mind	and	immediately	all
is	light.	Meditation	means	transcending	the	mind,	getting	out	of	the	darkness	into
the	 light.	Once	 you	 are	 in	 the	 light	 of	 no-mind,	 bliss	 arises.	 It	 does	 not	 come
from	the	outside,	it	explodes	within	you.	It	is	not	something	that	is	given	to	you
by	somebody;	hence	it	cannot	be	taken	away.	It	is	your	very	nature.	But	one	can
see	 it	only	when	 there	 is	 light,	one	cannot	see	 it	 in	darkness.	Hence	 the	whole
effort	of	all	the	mystics	of	all	the	ages	has	been	single:	to	drop	the	mind	and	to
go	into	a	state	of	no-mind.	And	that's	actually	the	process	of	sannyas	too.
Unless	one	knows	"I	am	something	above	the	mind,"	one	remains	ignorant.	The
moment	you	know	that	the	mind	is	only	a	mechanism	--	you	are	not	it,	you	are
the	watcher	 of	 it,	 the	witness	 of	 it	 --	 you	 have	moved	 from	misery	 into	 bliss,
from	the	night	into	the	day,	from	time	into	eternity.
In	the	East	we	make	small	earthen	lamps.	The	lamp	is	earthen,	made	of	mud,	but
the	light	is	not	earthen.
The	flame	is	not	the	earth.	The	lamp	belongs	to	the	earth	but	the	light,	the	flame,
belongs	to	the	beyond.
That's	exactly	 the	situation	of	our	being:	 the	body	belongs	 to	 the	earth	and	 the
soul	belongs	to	the	beyond.	If	we	forget	the	soul	completely	and	only	start	living
as	a	body	--	 that's	what	millions	of	people	are	doing	--	 then	we	have	forgotten
our	real	home.	Sooner	or	later	we	will	be	frustrated	because	the	earthen	lamp	can
never	be	eternal.	It	is	bound	to	break	at	any	moment,	any	small	accident	and	it
will	be	broken.
The	body	is	temporal,	a	temporary	residence.	It	 is	not	your	permanent	address.
And	we	have	to	search	for	the	permanent	address,	because	only	by	finding	it	will
we	be	able	to	find	something	which	abides	forever.	And	to	find	something	which
abides	forever	is	to	find	bliss,	because	it	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.
To	remain	attached	to	the	temporal,	to	the	changing	is	to	remain	within	the	world
of	misery	because	the	temporal	will	be	taken	away.	You	have	invested	so	much
in	it	but	one	day	everything	is	taken	away.	Then	it	is	natural	to	feel	miserable.
Misery	is	rooted	in	attachment	to	the	body	and	bliss	is	rooted	in	non-attachment
to	the	body;	hence	all	the	great	masters	have	been	teaching	methods	and	means
of	 non-attachment,	 of	 getting	 disidentified	with	 the	 body,	with	 the	mind,	with
everything	surrounds	you,	and	of	just	remaining	a	pure	witness.	That's	what	we
are:	pure	witnessing,	pure	awareness.
And	 that's	 exactly	my	work	here,	 to	 help	 you	 to	 experience	 it,	 to	 have	 a	 little
taste	 of	 it.	 Once	 you	 have	 tasted	 it	 then	 there	 is	 no	 problem.	You	will	 go	 on
moving	 towards	 it	 more	 and	 more.	 Just	 a	 drop	 of	 the	 nectar	 is	 enough	 to
transform	your	whole	life.
There	is	no	bliss	against	life,	although	that	has	been	the	idea	of	the	whole	of	past
humanity,	that	to	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
blissful	one	has	to	go	against	life,	one	has	to	renounce	life.	That	is	the	greatest
error	that	humanity	has	committed	up	to	now.	Bliss	is	through	life,	in	life,	with
life.	Bliss	is	life.
Going	against	life	is	death.	Renouncing	life	is	simply	renouncing	the	opportunity
to	 grow,	 to	 be	 mature,	 to	 be;	 hence	 iI	 am	 against	 all	 kinds	 of	 renunciation.
Renunciation	is	negative,	life-negative,	destructive.	It	has	destroyed	millions	of
people.	Monks	 and	 nuns	 of	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 victims.	They	 suffered
because	of	a	mass	hypnosis
My	 effort	 is	 absolutely	 against	 traditional	 religions.	 It	 may	 be	 Christianity,
Hinduism,	Jainism,	Buddhism,	it	doesn't	matter.	All	the	religions	have	been	life-
negative.	They	decided	to	be	life-negative	for	the	simple	reason	that	that	was	the
only	way	to	prove	who	is	holy	and	who	is	unholy:	the	people	who	love	life	are
unholy.	 Everybody	 loves	 life	 --	 that	 is	 natural.	 Then	 the	 holy	 man	 has	 to	 do
something	to	prove	that	he	 is	higher,	superior.	He	has	 to	do	something	just	 the
opposite	 of	 the	 ordinary	 humanity.	 He	 has	 to	 be	 extraordinary,	 and	 nothing
makes	 him	 more	 extraordinary	 than	 going	 against	 life.	 He	 starts	 swimming
against	the	current.	He	becomes	special,	very	special.	But	this	is	the	way	of	the
ego,	not	the	way	of	God.
And	the	saints	have	been	more	egoistic	 than	anybody	else.	They	are	not	saints
really.	They	are	suffering	from	megalomania.
A	really	religious	person	is	very	ordinary.	He	has	no	claims	to	extraordinariness.
Be	ordinary	but	be	totally	in	it.	Live	the	life	that	has	been	given	to	you	with	joy,
with	gratitude.	It	is	god's	gift.	To	me	this	is	sannyas,	this	is	a	true	religious	life.
When	life	is	God	then	you	are	moving	in	the	right	direction.
God	is	not	against	life,	otherwise	why	should	he	create	it	in	the	first	place?	God
is	absolutely	for	life.	It	is	his	creation.	It	is	out	of	his	love	that	he	has	created	it.
We	 have	 to	 live	 it	 so	 totally	 that	 the	 ego	 is	 lost	 in	 the	 living	 of	 it,	 that	 it
disappears.	And	to	live	life	egolessly	is	enough	--	more	than	that	is	not	needed	at
all.
It	opens	you	towards	God.
We	 take	 life	 for	 granted	 --	 that	 is	 our	 fundamental	 ignorance.	We	 never	 feel
thankful	for	life.	It	is	such	a	blessing.	We	are	not	worthy	of	it,	we	don't	deserve
it.	 it	 is	 given	out	 of	God's	 abundance,	 not	 because	 of	 our	worth.	We	have	not
earned	it.	It	is	a	gift,	not	a	reward.	And	God	gives	because	he	has	to	give;	he	has
so	much.
One	of	the	intrinsic	phenomena	of	bliss	is	that	it	needs	to	be	shared.	All	the	old
stories	of	 creation	 somehow	or	other	 imply	 that	God	was	alone	and	he	 started
feeling	very	lonely;	hence	he	created	the	world.
But	 I	 don't	 agree	 that	 he	 started	 feeling	 lonely	 and	 that's	 why	 he	 created	 the
world.	I	have	my	own	vision:	God	was	alone	and	he	started	feeling	so	burdened
with	bliss	that	he	wanted	to	share	it,	he	needed	people.
Not	 that	he	started	feeling	lonely	--	 that	doesn't	seem	right.	God	feeling	lonely
doesn't	fit,	it	is	a	contradiction	in	terms.	But	he	started	feeling	so	burdened	with
bliss,	so	overburdened,	and	there	was	nobody	to	share	it	with.	How	long	can	you
dance	alone?	You	need	a	partner.	How	 long	can	you	go	on	singing?	You	need
somebody	who	will	listen.
God	 gives	 because	 he	 has	 so	 much	 that	 he	 is	 heavy	 with	 bliss.	 Once	 we
understand	 this,	 that	we	have	not	earned	our	 life,	we	start	 thinking	 in	different
terms	 about	 the	whole	 phenomenon.	Then	 it	 is	 a	 blessing.	And	when	 life	 is	 a
blessing	prayer	arises,	 thankfulness	arises,	gratitude	 is	born.	To	be	a	sannyasin
means	the	birth	of	gratitude.
From	 this	 moment	 start	 looking	 at	 everything	 as	 a	 blessing.	 And	 when	 I	 say
everything,	 I	 mean	 everything.	 Even	 when	 you	 sometimes	 feel	 pain	 it	 is	 a
blessing.	 You	 may	 not	 understand,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 blessing.	 One	 day	 you	 will
understand	and	you	will	see	that	it	was	a	blessing,	that	it	was	needed,	absolutely
needed,	 that	 it	 helped	your	growth.	Even	 suffering	 is	 a	blessing.	 It	 cleanses,	 it
helps	you	to	become	integrated,	it	takes	childishness	away	from	you,	it	helps	you
to	become	mature.	A	certain	ripeness	arises	out	of	suffering.
A	man	who	has	never	 suffered	 remains	 childish,	 juvenile,	 superficial.	He	can't
understand	 life's	deeper	 things.	He	 thinks	 that	 life	 is	 just	a	merry-go-round,	 so
from	one	sensation	to	another	he	goes	on	moving.	He	is	continuously	greedy	and
hankering	for	all	kinds	of	toys.	But	they	are	toys.
The	man	who	has	suffered	enough	becomes	mature.	He	can	see	that	toys	are	toys
--	not	worth	the	labour,	not	worth	the	worry.	He	can	understand	the	depth,	and	he
can	 see	 other	 people's	 lives	with	more	 sympathy,	with	more	 compassion,	with
more	love.	Because	he	has	suffered	he	knows	what	suffering	is.	That	makes	him
more	human.	So	suffering	too	is	a	blessing.
Watch,	 observe	 and	 try	 to	 find	 a	 blessing	 everywhere.	 Sometimes	 it	 is	 in
disguise,	sometimes	not	so	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
much	 in	disguise,	 sometimes	utterly	nude.	But	 if	you	watch	you	will	 find	 it	 is
always	there;	in	success,	in	failure,	in	pain,	in	pleasure,	in	life,	in	death	too.	It	is
there	in	summer,	it	is	there	in	winter,	it	is	there	in	youth,	it	is	there	in	old	age.	It
is	 there	 in	health,	 it	 is	 there	 is	 illness.	 I	 call	 that	person	 religious	who	can	 see
blessings	 everywhere,	 who	 cannot	 find	 any	 place,	 any	 point	 which	 is	 not	 a
blessing.
It	is	only	such	rare	people	who	attain	to	the	ultimate.
Misery	makes	 one	mean,	 ignoble.	Misery	 is	 a	 sin	 because	 out	 of	misery	 only
misery	arises.	The	miserable	person	goes	on	radiating	misery	all	around	himself.
He	poisons	all	his	relationships,	he	even	poisons	strangers.	Whomsoever	comes
close	to	him,	he	sucks	his	energy.	He	is	destructive	in	a	very	subtle	way.	He	is
negative,	 that's	 why	 he	 is	 destructive.	 He	 is	 like	 a	 black	 hole.	 He	 cannot	 be
noble.
Only	 bliss	 is	 noble.	 When	 you	 are	 blissful	 you	 start	 sharing.	 Bliss	 has	 one
intrinsic	quality,	it	demands	sharing,	it	asks	you	to	share,	because	the	more	you
share,	the	more	it	grows.	It	is	an	inexhaustible	source.
The	blissful	person	has	a	grace.	The	blissful	person	can	never	be	mediocre.	He	is
pure	intelligence.
Nobility	is	not	something	that	you	can	cultivate,	but	you	can	learn	the	ways	of
being	blissful.	And	once	your	are	blissful	nobility	comes	of	its	own	accord	as	a
shadow.	It	is	a	by-product.
Misery	has	 to	be	earned.	 It	 is	 through	great	effort	 that	one	becomes	miserable.
And	 to	 remain	 miserable	 is	 really	 a	 miracle!	 (laughter)	 Only	 very	 rare
individuals	can	manage	it.	It	needs	extraordinary	energy.
Bliss	is	simple,	misery	is	complex.	Bliss	is	natural,	misery	is	unnatural.	To	main
the	unnatural	you	have	to	put	all	your	energy	into	it	--	to	be	natural	you	need	not
put	any	energy	into	it.	But	millions	of	people	are	miserable,	and	it	is	very	rare	to
find	a	person	who	is	not.	So	what	has	happened?
It	 is	 simple.	 To	 understand	 it	 is	 of	 immense	 significance.	 It	 is	 only	 through
misery	that	the	ego	can	exist,	because	you	have	to	make	an	effort	and	you	have
to	be	constantly	into	it,	creating	it,	maintaining	it.	Then	the	ego	can	remain.	And
if	one	loves	the	ego,	then	misery	is	necessary	to	keep	the	ego	alive.	In	a	state	of
bliss	ego	disappears	because	there	is	nothing	left	to	do	and	ego	can	exist	only	as
a	doer.	In	bliss	there	is	no	need	for	the	doer,	it	is	simply	our	nature	to	be	blissful.
It	is	like	health,	health	is	simply	our	nature.	Disease	is	an	accident.	So	when	you
are	healthy	you	don't	ask	how,	why.	When	you	are	ill	you	ask	"Why	am	I	ill?
What	is	the	cause	of	it?"
Misery	has	causes,	bliss	has	no	cause.	You	have	to	decide	only	one	thing;	if	you
are	ready	to	drop	the	ego	nobody	can	prevent	you	from	being	blissful.
So	let	sannyas	be	a	dropping	of	the	ego.	And	be	blissful	from	this	very	moment.
There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 go	 on	 maintaining	 your	 misery.	 Simple	 say	 "Enough	 is
enough!"
Bliss	is	divine.	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	human	effort,	hence	it	is	divine.	Misery
is	human,	 it	 is	our	work,	 it	 is	our	doing.	Bliss	has	only	 to	be	allowed.	We	can
prevent	it	from	happening	but	we	cannot	create	it.
It	 is	as	 if	 the	sun	has	 risen	but	you	stand	confronting	 the	sun	with	closed	eyes
and	you	remain	in	darkness.	The	sun	is	there,	you	can	be	in	light,	but	you	have
decided	not	to	receive	the	sun.	Then	you	can	remain	in	darkness.	Open	your	eyes
and	the	darkness	disappears.
Misery	is	our	decision.	We	have	decided	to	be	miserable,	we	have	decided	not	to
allow	the	bliss	 to	happen.	Although	we	go	on	saying	that	we	want	bliss,	really
we	 don't	 want	 it,	 we	 are	 afraid	 of	 it.	 That's	 my	 observation	 of	 thousands	 of
people,	 they	 are	 very	 afraid	 of	 bliss.	 With	 misery	 they	 are	 well-acquainted,
familiar,	at	home.	With	bliss	they	start	moving	into	the	unknown.	With	bliss	they
are	at	a	loss	as	to	what	to	do	ore	what	not	to	do.	In	fact	they	become	absolutely,
superfluous,	they	are	no	more	needed:	bliss	is	enough!	They	have	to	evaporate.
When	man	disappears,	bliss	appears.
And	my	work	here	is	simply	to	help	you	disappear,	to	help	you	evaporate.
(a	little	chuckle)	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Till	you	send	me	away
--	No,	I	will	never	send	you	away!
Bliss	is	the	most	godly	thing,	misery	the	most	ungodly.	Misery	is	a	sin,	bliss	is	a
virtue.	But	we	have	worshipped	misery,	we	have	worshipped	people	who	were
deliberately	 miserable.	 Sad,	 long	 faces	 became	 our	 saints.	 The	 dancers,	 the
singers,	the	poets,	the	musicians	--	they	were	not	our	saints.	In	fact	they	should
be	 the	 saints	 because	 they	 enhance	 life,	 they	make	 it	 richer,	 they	give	 it	more
beauty,	 they	 leave	 the	world	 a	 little	 better	 than	 they	 found	 it.	That	 is	 the	only
way	to	serve	god,	to	worship	god.
Anything	 that	creates	bliss	 in	you	 is	sacred.	So	 let	bliss	be	 the	whole	 target	of
your	life.	In	every	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
possible	way	become	more	and	more	blissful.	Don't	be	serious	and	don't	be	sad.
The	 universe	 is	 a	 celebration,	 participate	 in	 the	 celebration.	 And	 you	 can
participate	 only	 if	 you	 are	 cheerful.	The	 stars	 are	 dancing,	 become	part	 of	 the
dance.
That's	my	teaching,	 that	 is	my	initiation	into	sannyas,	 to	help	you	sing,	 to	help
you	love,	to	help	you	dance.
Only	a	blissful	person	can	bring	truth	to	the	world.	It	is	only	out	of	bliss	that	you
become	a	vehicle	of	God.	When	one	is	blissful	one	becomes	just	a	window.	God
can	look	through	that	window	into	the	world	and	the	world	can	look	through	the
window	into	God.	One	becomes	just	a	hollow	bamboo,	then	God	can	sing	many
many	songs	through	the	flute.	But	those	songs	come	from	God.	Our	function	is
only	one:	not	to	hinder	them,	not	to	distort	them.
It	cannot	happen	in	a	state	of	misery.	A	miserable	person	is	constantly	distorting
truth.	He	himself	 is	 in	 such	 a	 distortion.	He	himself	 is	 in	 so	many	pieces	 that
whatsoever	goes	through	him	becomes	something	other	than	what	is	was.	Just	by
passing	 through	 the	 distorted	 person,	 it	 becomes	 distorted.	He	 is	 not	 empty;	 a
miserable	 person	 is	 full	 of	 his	 misery.	 That	 is	 something	 tremendously
significant	 to	remember:	a	miserable	person	 is	very	full	 --	of	garbage,	 rubbish,
but	very	full.
The	blissful	person	is	very	empty.	He	is	just	space.	And	through	this	emptiness
god	can	flow	into	the	world.
Become	 empty,	 become	 blissful	 --	 and	 they	 go	 together	 very	well.	 If	 you	 are
blissful	you	will	become	empty,	if	you	are	empty	you	will	become	blissful.	It	is
impossible	for	the	empty	person	to	be	miserable.
There	 is	 nothing	 left	 to	 be	 miserable	 about,	 you	 are	 not	 even	 there	 to	 be
miserable.	 The	 emptiness	 is	 so	 total	 that	 there	 is	 no	 I	 left	 behind	who	 can	 be
miserable.	The	empty	person	 is	not	a	person	at	 all;	he	 is	 simply	emptiness,	 an
open	 sky,	 unclouded.	 Hence	 through	 the	 empty	 person	 all	 the	 beauty	 and	 the
benediction	and	the	blessing	of	God	flows	through.	The	empty	person	becomes
his	messenger,	he	brings	truth	to	the	world.
Jesus	 is	 an	 empty	 person,	 so	 is	 Buddha,	 so	 is	 Lao	 Tzu.	 And	 everybody	 can
become	that	empty.
Meditation	makes	you	empty	on	 the	one	hand	and	on	 the	other	hand	 it	makes
you	blissful.	They	happen	simultaneously.
Bliss	is	our	home.	If	we	are	living	in	misery	we	are	living	somewhere	else,	not	in
our	 own	 home.	We	 are	 not	 living	 in	 our	 nature.	 We	 are	 living	 in	 something
accidental.	The	moment	you	start	 living	 in	your	essential	being,	 life	 is	bliss.	 If
you	 go	 astray...	 the	 farther	 away	 you	 go	 from	 you	 essential	 core,	 the	 more
miserable	you	become.	Misery	is	really	the	measurement	of	how	distant	you	are
from	home.
So	remember	 it:	whenever	you	are	more	miserable	 that	simply	means	 that	you
have	gone	really	far	away	from	your	home.	Come	back!
People	go	on	doing	 a	 thousand	other	 things	 rather	 than	 coming	back	home.	 If
they	are	miserable	they	go	on	throwing	the	responsibility	on	others.	The	wife	is
creating	 the	 trouble,	 the	 husband	 thinks	 that's	 why	 he	 is	 miserable....	 or	 the
society	or	the	state.	There	are	a	thousand	and	one	excuses.	One	can	always	find
them,	they	are	always	available.	If	you	can't	find	them	you	can	invent	them.	But
no	 excuse	 is	 going	 to	 help,	 it	 simply	 prolongs	 your	misery	more.	 There	 is	 no
excuse	for	your	misery	except	the	truth	--	and	the	truth	is	that	you	are	very	far
away	from	your	being.
So	whenever	you	 are	miserable	go	 into	meditation:	 become	 silent,	watch	your
misery,	become	a	witness	to	it,	don't	become	identified	with	it,	and	you	will	be
surprised	 that	 the	more	 you	watch,	 the	 less	 it	 is.	And	when	 you	 are	 perfectly
watchful	it	simply	disappears,	as	if	it	had	never	been	there.	Not	even	a	trace	is
left	behind.	And	suddenly	you	will	find	that	the	same	energy	that	was	becoming
your	misery	has	become	a	showering	of	bliss.	You	have	come	home.
We	have	 to	 constantly	 come	back	home	because	our	habit	 is	 to	go	 astray.	For
lives	together	we	have	been	going	astray.	For	lives	together	we	have	been	going
astray.	It	has	become	habitual.
Sannyas	means	a	determined	effort	to	remember	that	"Whenever	I	am	miserable
I	have	to	go	back	to	my	sources,	to	my	roots."	Slowly	slowly	you	become	aware
of	the	whole	process	of	misery	and	then	you	go	away	from	your	home	less	and
less.	More	and	more	you	become	centred	and	more	and	more	bliss	is	there.
When	one	is	one	hundred	per	cent	centred	and	awareness	is	total,	bliss	is	infinite,
you	 have	 arrived	 home.	 Call	 it	 paradise,	 nirvana,	 moksha,	 liberation,	 but	 the
most	beautiful	word	is	"home."
Sannyas	is	the	return	journey	home.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	Consciousness
5	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002055
ShortTitle:	WITHME05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	goal	of	the	meditator	is	to	find	out	who	he	is.	When	one	goes	on	enquiring
"Who	am	 I?"	 "Who	am	 I?",slowly	 slowly,	one	comes	 to	 a	point	where	 action,
thought,	 feeling	 --	 all	 are	 negated,	 and	 there	 is	 nothing	 else	 left	 to	 negate	 any
more.	 There	 is	 only	 pure	 consciousness.	 You	 cannot	 negate	 that.	 Who	 will
negate	it?
You	are	a	pure	knower,	a	seer.
To	know	this	is	the	real	beginning	of	life.
The	lotus	symbolises	the	ultimate	flowering	of	consciousness.
Right	 now	 you	 are	 just	 like	 a	 bud,	 closed;	 hence	 your	 fragrance	 is	 not	 being
released.	Sannyas	is	a	process	of	opening	the	petals	of	the	lotus.	Sannyas	is	like
sunrise.	Being	with	a	master	means	entering	into	a	sunlit	world.	And	as	the	sun
rises	 the	 lotus	petals	start	opening,	naturally	--	 they	are	not	 to	be	forced	--	and
then	great	fragrance	is	released.	That	fragrance	is	bliss,	peace,	celebration.	One
has	come	 to	 fulfillment,	one	has	come	 to	be	utterly	contented	because	one	has
given	 whatsoever	 was	 one's	 destiny,	 one	 has	 poured	 it	 into	 existence.
Whatsoever	one	was	capable	of	contributing,	creating,	one	has	done	 it.	That	 is
the	ultimate	act	of	creativity,	and	naturally	after	that	ultimate	act	one	feels	utterly
satisfied,	contented.
This	happens	 in	 small	 activities	also.	When	you	do	 something	creative	a	great
contentment	arises.	When	you	finish	a	painting	a	silence	falls	over	you.	You	feel
fulfilled,	 meaningful,	 significant,	 you	 have	 done	 something.	 You	 have
participated	in	God's	work.	He	is	a	creator	and	you	have	been	a	creator	in	your
own	way,	a	small	way	of	course,	but	you	participated	with	God,	you	walked	with
God	--	maybe	only	for	a	few	steps,	but	you	walked	with	God.
But	 the	ultimate	act	of	creativity	 is	 the	 flowering	of	your	consciousness.	After
that	 you	 never	 leave	God	 for	 a	 single	moment.	 Then	 the	whole	 pilgrimage	 is
with	him,	within	him.	Naturally	 it	 is	 tremendously	 fulfilling.	There	can	be	not
other	fulfilment	higher	than	that,	greater	than	that.	It	is	the	very	peak.
Florian	means	a	 flower	of	beauty.	 It	 can	only	bloom	when	your	consciousness
rises	upwards.
Roses	 are	 beautiful,	 lotuses	 are	 beautiful,	 buth	 they	 are	 not	 flowers	 of	 beauty.
They	 are	 beautiful	 flowers,	 of	 course,	 but	 not	 flowers	 of	 beauty.	 Flowers	 of
beauty	happen	in	your	innermost	core.	They	happen	through	inner	growth,	when
you	 transform	 your	 potential	 into	 actuality.	When	 you	 really	 become	 a	 being,
when	there	is	no	more	to	life,	when	you	have	experienced	life	in	its	totality,	then
something	flowers	in	you.	That	flowering	brings	you	for	the	first	time	a	gift	from
God.
There	are	many	gifts	from	God	--	birth	is	a	gift,	life	is	a	gift,	love	is	a	gift	--	but
the	ultimate	gift	is	when	your	consciousness	becomes	a	lotus.	When	one	flower
of	beauty	blooms	in	you.	In	Japan	they	call	it	satori,	in	India	we	call	it	samadhi.
It	can	be	translated	as	ultimate	ecstasy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Rebellion	 can	 be	 something	 on	 the	 outside,	 then	 it	 is	 political,	 social.	 But	 if
rebellion	 is	 on	 the	 inside	 then	 it	 is	 religious,	 spiritual.	 Every	 rebellion	 on	 the
outside	 has	 failed,	 because	 the	 people	 who	 have	 not	 gone	 through	 inner
revolution	cannot	bring	revolution	to	the	outside.
First	 the	 revolutionary	has	 to	go	 through	a	 revolution	himself	 --	and	he	knows
nothing	 of	 the	 inner	 world	 and	 its	 revolution.	 He	 has	 not	 moved	 from	 the
unconscious	to	the	conscious,	from	the	mind	to	the	state	of	no-mind.	He	has	not
yet	 moved	 from	 logic	 to	 love.	 He	 is	 still	 in	 deep	 ignorance	 of	 his	 own	 self.
Nothing	has	happened	 inside	him,	and	he	wants	 to	 transform	the	whole	world,
change	the	whole	world	into	a	better	world.	He	only	creates	more	nuisance,	he
only	messes	things	up	more	than	they	were	before.
The	whole	credit	goes	to	the	revolutionaries.	If	the	world	is	in	such	a	mess	it	is
because	of	so	many	revolutions.	Utterly	ignorant	people,	not	knowing	even	the
ABC	of	the	inner	world,	are	trying	to	change	the	world.	With	no	light	inside	they
are	blind,	and	whatsoever	they	do	is	going	to	harem.	Of	course	their	intentions
are	good	but	just	good	intentions	don't	help.	Somebody's	intention	may	be	good
and	he	may	operate	on	your	appendix	knowing	nothing	of	surgery.	He	may	not
even	be	able	to	recognise	the	appendix.
His	 intention	 is	 good:	 you	 are	 in	 pain,	 he	 opens	 your	 stomach	 to	 remove	 the
appendix.	 But	 he	 will	 do	 harm,	 he	 will	 kill	 you.	 And	 that's	 what	 has	 been
happening	in	the	world.
Only	 buddhas	 can	 bring	 revolution	 because	 they	 have	 gone	 through	 inner
transformation	themselves.
But	not	Marx	or	Lenin	or	Trotzky	--	these	people	cannot	bring	revolution.	They
don't	know	anything	of	inner	world.	They	are	utterly	blind.
Sannyas	is	basically,	essentially	an	effort	 to	change	your	 inner	world.	I	am	not
concerned	 with	 the	 social	 or	 the	 political	 structure.,	 I	 am	 concerned	 with	 the
structure	of	your	consciousness,	how	your	mind	functions	and	how	you	can	be
the	master	of	it.	That	is	the	revolution.
Only	one	revolution	has	never	failed,	but	that	happens	very	rarely.	It	happens	in
the	 individual	 heart,	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 a	 Jesus,	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 a	 Buddha.	 It	 can
happen	in	your	heart	too.	The	thing	that	brings	it	is	awareness.
The	 heart	 can	 exist	 either	 in	 darkness	 or	 in	 light,	 either	 unconsciously	 or
consciously.	 When	 we	 start	 changing	 our	 energies	 from	 unconsciousness
towards	consciousness	the	heart	goes	through	a	radical	change.
It	is	transmuted,	transformed.	It	is	no	more	the	same	heart.	It	is	no	more	human,
it	is	divine.	Then	god	beats	in	it,	then	god	works	through	it,	flows	through	it.
Once	you	are	awakened	you	start	living	life	in	a	totally	different	way.	Although
your	life	remains	the	same	you	are	no	more	the	same.	Your	approach	is	different,
your	very	style	is	different.	You	live	more	consciously.	You	don't	go	on	groping
in	darkness.	You	live	through	the	heart	and	not	through	the	head.
Your	life	becomes	love,	compassion.	It	becomes	a	song,	a	dance,	a	celebration.
And	of	course	whomsoever	comes	in	contact	with	you	will	be	infected	by	it.	It	is
contagious.	It	is	like	fire,	wildfire:	it	goes	on	spreading.
I	have	chosen	the	color	of	fire,	wild	fire	for	my	sannyasins.	We	have	to	surround
the	whole	earth	with	wildfire.	And	once	your	inside	rubbish	is	burned	you	will
create	many	ripples	around,	naturally,	spontaneously,	which	will	affect	the	social
structure,	 the	 economic	 structure	 as	 a	 consequence,	 as	 a	 by-product	 --	 but	 not
directly.
That	 is	 not	 our	 concern	 but	 it	 does	 happen.	 If	many	 people	 are	 changed,	 it	 is
bound	to	affect	the	society	on	the	outside	too.	But	that	is	not	our	goal.	We	are	not
interested	in	it.
Our	interest	is	basically	the	change	of	your	interiority.	We	have	to	make	it	full	of
light	--	right	now	it	is	a	completely	dark	continent.
There	 is	 a	 possibility	 either	 to	 fight	with	 outer	 enemies	 or	 to	 fight	with	 inner
enemies.	It	is	easy	to	fight	with	the	outer	enemies	because	they	are	visible.	It	is
difficult	 to	 fight	with	 the	 inner	 enemies	 because	 they	 are	 not	 visible	 and	 they
have	 become	 so	much	 a	 part	 of	 you	 that	 you	 don't	 think	 of	 them	 as	 separate.
They	are	separate.
People	decide	to	fight	on	the	outside	to	avoid	the	inner	war.	They	are	afraid	of
the	 inner	 friction.	But	one	grows	 through	 inner	 friction.	There	are	paths	which
are	based	only	on	inner	friction,	for	example,	George	Gurdjieff's	method.
Its	whole	idea	is	to	create	inner	friction	in	you	and	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	it.
For	example,	if	you	want	to	fight	then	fight	with	your	with	your	anger,	greed.	Of
course	 it	 is	 not	 an	ordinary	 fight	 and	you	 cannot	 use	ordinary	weapons	 either.
You	 will	 have	 to	 learn	 different	 kinds	 of	 strategies,	 you	 will	 have	 to	 learn	 a
totally	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
different	 methodology.	 That	 methodology	 is	 meditation,	 awareness.	 Gurdjieff
used	to	call	it	self-remembering.	Whenever	you	are	in	anger,	remember	yourself.
In	 that	 very	 remembering	 the	 focus	 changes,	 the	 gestalt	 changes.	You	become
more	and	more	centred.	Anger	remains	there	just	on	the	periphery	of	your	being,
but	you	know	now	that	it	is	separate	from	you.	You	are	not	angry,	you	are	only	a
witness	to	it.	Now	it	is	up	to	you	to	choose	to	be	angry	or	not	to	be	angry.	You
are	no	more	identified;	hence	the	freedom	to	choose.
Ordinarily	you	cannot	choose.	You	don't	have	enough	space	to	choose.	You	are
so	identified	that	when	anger	comes	you	are	angry,	it	is	not	something	separate.
It	overwhelms	you.	And	so	is	the	case	with	greed	and	other	kinds	of	desire.
Sannyas	means	that	the	real	war	has	to	be	fought	within.	The	real	victory	has	to
happen	 within.	 And	 the	 basic	 strategy	 of	 the	 war	 is	 awareness.	 It	 is	 through
awareness	you	will	be	able	to	transform	all	your	enemies	into	your	friends.	That
is	true	victory.	It	is	not	destructive,	it	is	transformative.
And	 one	who	 is	 a	master	 of	 oneself	 is	 really	 a	master.	His	 is	 the	 kingdom	of
God.
Kabira	is	a	Sufi	name	for	God;	it	means	the	vast	one.	It	is	also	the	name	of	one
of	 the	 greatest	mystics	 of	 the	 East,	 the	 only	mystic	 who	 comes	 very	 close	 to
Jesus,	because	he	was	as	poor	as	Jesus.
Jesus	was	a	carpenter's	son	and	Kabira	was	a	weaver's	son;	both	speak	the	same
fiery	language,	with	the	same	rebellion	in	their	heart.	Buddha	and	Mahavira	are
soft-spoken;	they	come	from	royal	families,	very	cultured.	Even	if	they	want	to
hit	they	will	hit	in	a	very	civilised	way.
Kabira	and	Jesus	are	totally	different.	They	come	from	the	lowest	classes.	They
are	 absolutely	 uneducated,	 uncultured,	 very	 raw	 but	 very	 alive	 too.	 In	 fact
because	 they	are	 so	 raw	 they	are	 so	alive.	Their	message	 simply	goes	 into	 the
heart	like	an	arrow.	They	are	pure	fire.
Become	a	blissful	rebel.	Revolution	is	political,	rebellion	is	spiritual.	Revolution
wants	to	change	something	on	the	outside,	rebellion	changes	your	consciousness.
And	it	is	only	by	transforming	your	consciousness	totally	that	you	will	become
vast,	godlike,	and	you	will	attain	to	ultimate	bliss,	truth,	love,	freedom.
We	can	exist	 either	as	minds	or	as	no-minds.	 If	we	exist	 as	minds	we	become
machines	because	mind	is	a	machine.	It	is	just	a	biocomputer...	very	skilful,	very
capable	 and	 immensely	 valuable,	 but	 if	 you	 exist	 as	 the	 mind	 you	 lose	 all
freedom.	You	become	encaged	in	a	small	mechanism,	 the	mechanism	becomes
your	boundary.
And	mind	can	function	only	according	to	the	past	because	mind	means	past.	It	is
accumulated	experience	and	knowledge,	information.	And	when	you	function	as
the	past	you	lose	contact	with	the	present,	and	the	present	is	the	only	reality.	To
be	 in	 contact	with	 the	present	 one	needs	 to	go	 a	 little	 higher	 than	 the	mind,	 a
little	 above	 the	 mind.	 You	 are	 consciousness,	 which	 is	 a	 totally	 different
phenomenon.
That's	 the	 goal	 of	 the	 meditator:	 to	 find	 out	 who	 he	 is.	 When	 one	 goes	 on
enquiring	"Who	am	I?	Who	am	I?'	slowly	slowly	one	comes	to	the	point	where
body	is	negated,	mind	is	negated,	heart	is	negated;	action,	thought,	feeling	--	all
are	negated	and	there	is	nothing	else	left	to	negate	any	more.	There	is	only	pure
consciousness.	You	cannot	negate	that.	Who	will	negate	it?
You	are	a	pure	knower,	a	pure	seer.	And	to	know	it	is	the	real	beginning	of	life.
Then	 one	 is	 truly	 born,	 born	 in	God.	 Then	 life	 has	 a	 different	 flavour.	 It	 is	 a
dance,	it	is	a	song,	it	is	a	celebration.
We	 are	 not	 the	 body	 and	we	 are	 not	 the	mind	 either.	Mind	 is	 also	 part	 of	 the
body.	 The	 visible	 part	 is	 called	 body,	 the	 invisible	 part	 is	 called	mind.	 It	 is	 a
psychosomatic	mechanism	and	we	are	the	witness	of	it.
We	are	in	it	but	we	are	not	it.
This	 is	 the	greatest	 experience.	Once	 it	has	happened	your	 life	goes	 through	a
radical	change.	Then	you	are	never	the	same	again.	It	is	a	breakthrough.
The	 whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 this	 breakthrough	 closer	 and	 closer.	 Every
support,	every	technique	and	device	is	provided	for	this	breakthrough	so	that	you
can	see	yourself	as	a	witness	of	it	all,	as	pure	consciousness.
To	know	oneself	as	pure	consciousness	 is	 to	be	 free	of	all	bondage.	 It	 is	 to	be
free	of	birth	and	death,	it	is	to	be	free	of	time.	It	is	to	become	part	of	eternity,	it	is
to	become	part	of	God.	And	that	is	liberation,	that	is	nirvana,	that	is	the	ultimate
goal	of	life,	the	summun	bonum.
Silence	can	be	superficial.	 If	you	cultivate	 it,	 it	will	be	superficial.	That's	what
many	people	go	on	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
doing;	sitting	still	in	a	certain	posture,	trying	to	force	the	mind	to	be	silent.	If	you
go	on	doing	it	for	a	long	time	you	create	a	kind	of	auto-hypnosis	and	you	start
feeling	a	certain	silence.	You	can	use	a	mantra	and	you	can	chant	it.	That	will	be
again	 nothing	 but	 an	 auto-hypnotic	 device.	 You	 can	 visualise	 Jesus,	 Krishna,
Buddha,	 and	 that	 too	 is	 nothing	 but	 an	 effort	 to	 repress	 the	mind	 by	 a	 certain
visualisation	process.
In	 the	 name	 of	 meditation...	 ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 are	 auto-hypnotic	 devices.
What	 Maharishi	 Mahesh	 Yogi	 calls	 transcendental	 meditation	 is	 neither
transcendental	nor	meditation;	it	is	just	a	non-medical	tranquilliser.	It	helps	you
to	 attain	 a	 superficial	 silence.	 It	 does	 not	 transform	 you,	 it	 cannot	 --	 that	 is
beyond	its	capacity.	For	a	few	days	you	can	play	with	it	and	then	you	start	seeing
that	it	is	just	futile,	you	are	stuck	at	a	point.
Deep	 silence	 means	 silence	 that	 comes	 out	 of	 awareness;	 not	 by	 chanting	 a
mantra,	 not	 by	 any	visualisation,	 not	 by	 imagination,	 but	 just	 by	watching	 the
mind	and	 its	subtle	ways,	 its	cunning	ways,	 just	by	being	an	observer,	 looking
into	 the	matters	 of	 the	mind,	 into	 the	 very	 process	 of	 the	mind	 --	 the	 way	 it
functions,	 how	 a	 thought	 arises,	 how	 it	 becomes	 a	 cloud	 around	 you,	 how	 it
disappears	 --	as	 if	 it	has	nothing	 to	do	with	you.	You	are	 just	a	spectator.	And
you	are	not	doing	anything,	no	mantra,	no	technique	--
nothing.	 You	 are	 simply	 watching,	 a	 natural	 process.	 You	 are	 not	 imposing
anything	upon	the	mind,	you	are	not	trying	to	force	the	mind	to	be	quiet.	You	are
not	saying	to	the	mind	"Shut	up!"	You	are	simply	seeing	the	game,	all	kinds	of
games	that	the	mind	plays.
It	 is	 a	multi-dimensional	 game.	Desires	 are	 there	 and	memories	 are	 there	 and
imagination	 and	 the	 past	 and	 the	 future	 and	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 projections,
hopes,	 expectations.	 Just	 go	 on	 watching	 with	 no	 condemnation,	 neither
condemning	nor	getting	identified:	just	remaining	aloof,	cool,	unconcerned,	as	if
one	is	standing	by	the	side	of	the	road	looking	at	the	traffic.	Then	one	day	real
silence	happens.	Suddenly	the	road	is	there	but	the	traffic	has	disappeared.	And
you	have	not	done	anything	to	make	it	disappear	so	it	can't	be	anything	forced,
cultivated.	It	has	happened	on	its	own,	it	happens	of	its	own	accord.
As	 your	watchfulness	 becomes	 stronger,	 the	mind	 becomes	weaker.	When	 the
watchfulness	 is	one	hundred	per	cent,	 the	mind	 is	zero.	When	 the	mind	 is	one
hundred	per	cent,	the	watchfulness	is	zero.	It	is	the	same	energy	--	it	can	either
become	watchfulness	or	 it	can	become	the	mind,	 thinking,	desiring.	When	you
are	watching	you	are	withdrawing	the	energy	from	the	mind.	It	is	getting	more
and	more	involved	in	watchfulness.
One	day	when	one	hundred	per	cent	of	the	energy	has	become	centred,	the	mind
simply	disappears.	It	is	just	as	dreams	disappear	in	the	morning	when	you	wake
up.	 It	 is	 an	 inner	 awakening.	And	 then	 you	 know	 for	 the	 first	 time	what	 real
silence	is,	what	deep	silence	is.
Only	that	deep	silence	can	take	you	to	the	ultimate,	 to	God,	 to	truth.	Only	that
deep	 silence	 can	 liberate	 you	 from	 all	 kinds	 of	 illusions,	 from	 all	 kinds	 of
despair,	miseries.
The	only	thing	in	life	which	is	absolutely	constant	is	awareness.	Everything	else
goes	 on	 changing.	 The	 body	 changes	 every	moment,	 the	mind	 changes	 every
split	 second,	 the	world	goes	on	changing.	 If	 you	 look	outside	you	cannot	 find
anything	that	is	not	in	a	flux.	But	if	you	look	inside	then	one	centre	can	be	found
which	 is	 not	 part	 of	 the	 world	 of	 change.	 That's	 your	 awareness,	 your
consciousness.
Consciousness	 is	 the	only	constant	phenomenon.	To	know	what	 consciousness
is,	is	to	know	God,	because	to	know	consciousness	is	to	go	beyond	time,	beyond
change.	It	is	entering	into	the	world	of	eternity.
Man	 tries	 in	 every	 possible	way	 to	 achieve	 bliss,	 by	 accumulating	money,	 by
becoming	powerful,	by	becoming	respectable,	by	becoming	knowledgeable.	But
all	 these	ways	are	doomed	to	fail.	They	cannot	bring	bliss	 to	you.	Bliss	comes
only	in	one	way	and	that	is	by	your	becoming	more	conscious.	The	more	you	are
conscious,	the	more	you	are	blissful;	the	less	conscious,	the	more	miserable.
Ordinarily,	if	we	divide	our	being	into	ten	parts,	then	only	one	part	is	conscious,
nine	parts	are	unconscious.	And	that's	exactly	the	proportion	of	misery	and	bliss
in	our	life.	In	ten	days	there	is	one	day	when	you	feel	at	home,	relaxed,	happy,
joyous.	You	can	feel	the	beauty	of	nature.	You	are	more	sensitive,	more	loving,
more	open,	restful,	and	the	world	seems	to	be	your	home...	But	it	is	only	for	one
day	and	 then	again	for	nine	days	 it	 is	hell.	Those	nine	days	are	 too	much,	and
that	one	day	seems	to	be	almost	illusory	compared	to	those	nine	days	of	misery.
If	somebody	has	to	live	nine	days	in	hell	and	one	day	in	heaven	he	is	bound	to
think	that	that	one	day	must	have	been	a	dream.	Because	the	reality	is	this,	that
nine	days	you	are	in	hell.	This	is	real.	The	proportion	it	too	great.
Being	a	sannyasin	means	that	now	efforts	will	be	made	to	make	more	and	more
parts	of	your	being	conscious.	Slowly	slowly,	as	consciousness	becomes	bigger
and	unconsciousness	shrinks,	you	become	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
blissful,	more	and	more	blissful.	You	start	opening	up	like	a	flower.	We	are	like
buds,	closed,	as	bliss	comes	you	become	a	flower.	 In	 the	East	we	say	 that	one
becomes	a	lotus,	a	one-thousand-petalled	lotus.	Everybody	is	carrying	the	seed,
the	bud,	 but	 great	 effort	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 conscious.	Unconsciousness	 has	 been
our	habit	for	so	many	lives	that	it	has	almost	become	our	nature.
So	from	this	moment	try	to	be	more	and	more	conscious	in	everything	that	you
do,	in	everything	that	you	think,	in	everything	that	you	feel.	These	are	the	three
dimensions.	 In	all	 these	 three	dimensions	you	have	 to	be	more	watchful,	more
alert,	more	of	a	witness.	Between	these	 three	arises	 the	fourth,	 the	witness	and
that	is	your	true	nature.
Once	you	have	 learned	how	to	create	 the	witness	you	know	the	secret	art,	you
know	the	alchemy	of	transforming	the	dark	continent	in	your	being	into	light.
Chinmayo	means	 consciousness,	 pure	 consciousness.	That	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your
meditation.	Walking,	walk	 consciously,	 as	 if	 you	 are	 surrounded	by	danger	on
every	side	--	wild	animals	are	there	and	you	have	to	be	very	cautious	and	alert	--
as	if	you	are	walking	on	a	tightrope:	slight	unawareness	and	you	will	fall.	So	you
have	to	be	alert.	Your	life	is	at	risk.
And	 that	 is	exactly	 the	case:	we	are	walking	on	a	 tightrope,	completely	drunk.
The	whole	credit	goes	to	the	rope!	How	does	it	maintain	us?	It	is	a	miracle	to	see
people	walking	and	not	 falling	apart	 into	pieces,	somehow	keeping	 themselves
together,	 totally	unaware.	No	 light	 inside,	no	centre	 inside,	no	 rootedness,	 still
somehow	go	on	dragging.
Walk,	but	walk	consciously	and	then	you	will	slowly	see	how	you	have	walked
before.	Eat,	 but	 eat	 consciously.	All	 small	 things	 have	 to	 be	 done	 consciously
and	 then	 slowly	 slowly	 the	 last	 thing	 can	 also	 be	 done	 consciously	 --	 that	 is
sleep.	And	the	day	that	one	can	sleep	consciously	the	ultimate	in	consciousness
has	 been	 achieved.	 That	 very	 day	 one	 becomes	 awakened.	 Then	 all	 sleep
disappears	forever.	I	don't	mean	physical	sleep,	I	mean	metaphysical	sleep.	All
unconsciousness	disappears	forever.
So	you	are	not	to	make	meditation	a	separate	thing	in	your	life	that	you	will	do
every	day	for	one	hour.
No	 --	 it	 has	 to	 spread	 over	 your	 whole	 life.	 Cleaning	 the	 floor,	 washing	 the
clothes,	cooking	the	food,	taking	care	of	the	home	--	whatsoever	you	are	doing
let	 it	 all	 be	meditative,	 conscious.	 In	 this	way	 twenty-four	hours	 a	day	 can	be
devoted	to	meditation.	And	each	act	that	you	do	with	consciousness	will	become
more	 efficient,	 more	 beautiful,	 more	 graceful.	 Naturally,	 a	 man	 who	 eats
consciously	cannot	eat	more	 than	 is	needed,	he	cannot	eat	 less	 than	 is	needed.
But	the	man	who	eats	unconsciously	goes	on	stuffing,	he	does	not	know	when	to
stop.	He	can	eat	 too	much,	and	then	he	can	move	like	a	pendulum	to	the	other
extreme.	 If	 he	 eats	 too	much	 naturally	 he	 suffers.	Because	 of	 the	 suffering	 he
move	to	the	other	extreme;	he	eats	so	little	that	it	is	not	sufficient	for	his	bodily
needs.	He	may	start	dieting.
[missing	page:	178]
Accidental	from	the	intrinsic,	the	natural	from	the	artificial,	the	inevitable	from
the	arbitrary.	All	this	becomes	possible	only	through	a	single	thing,	awareness.
So	paramhansa	simply	represents	awareness.	Become	more	and	more	aware	so
that	you	can	see	what	is	worthless	and	what	is	valuable.	The	moment	you	start
seeing	 what	 is	 worthless,	 the	 worthless	 starts	 disappearing	 from	 your	 life
because	 you	 cannot	 cling	 to	 it	 anymore.	 In	 your	 seeing	 that	 it	 is	worthless,	 it
drops	from	your	hands	of	its	own	accord.	Not	that	you	have	to	renounce	it,	not
that	you	have	to	make	an	effort	 to	drop	it	 --	 it	drops	easily.	You	don't	 feel	any
regret,	you	don't	repent	and	you	don't	brag	about	it,	that	you	have	renounced	it.
How	can	you	brag	if	you	see	that	it	is	worthless?	And	the	moment	you	see	the
worthless	 you	 are	 bound	 to	 see	 that	 which	 is	 really	 valuable.	 And	 to	 see	 the
valuable	 is	 to	do	it!	You	can't	do	otherwise.	Seeing	becomes	doing.	Awareness
becomes	action.
I	don't	teach	character,	I	teach	consciousness,	because	consciousness	character.
[There	follows	two	interviews	with:	Ma	Ananda	Vandana	and	Ma	Anand	Sarita,
which	are	not	included	here.]
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	Prayer
6	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002065
ShortTitle:	WITHME06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
God	is	for	gamblers	who	can	risk	all	for	the	unknown.	The	gambler	is	not	really
interested	in	winning.
His	whole	interest	is	in	gambling.	When	he	risks,	time	stops	for	him,	mind	stops
for	him,	his	heart	misses	a	beat.	that	is	his	joy.	In	that	suspense	he	unknowingly
tastes	something	of	meditation.
We	 are	 doing	 it	 here	 very	 knowingly,	 deliberately.	 I	 am	 teaching	 you	 to	 be
gamblers.	 I	 am	 asking	 you	 to	 risk	 your	 life,	 and	 to	 risk	 it	 for	 the	 unknown.
Worship	means	risking	all	that	you	have	in	the	search.
[There	is	an	interview	with	Ma	Anand	Savita	which	is	not	included	here.]
Prayer	does	not	mean	talking	to	God,	because	God	understand	no	language,	or,
he	understand	only	the	language	of	silence.
To	me	 utterly	 in	 silence	 is	 prayer,	 not	 repeating	 certain	 formulas,	 The	 Lord's
Prayer	 and	 this	 and	 that	 and	 all	 that	 nonsense.	 Prayer	 cannot	 be	 reduced	 to
words,	 all	 words	 falsify	 prayer.	 And	 that's	 what	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 been
teaching	people:	words	and	words.
True	prayer	is	the	art	of	silence.	One	is	simply	silent,	with	no	motive,	because	if
there	 is	a	motive	silence	cannot	be	 true.	The	motive	will	 remain	 there,	 lurking
around.	If	one	is	silent	for	the	sheer	joy	of	being	silent	then	it	is	prayer.
And	the	second	thing	to	remember....	The	first	is,	no	word	is	needed,	the	second
is,	 coming	with	God	means	 listening	 to	him,	not	 saying	 something	 to	him.	Be
silent	and	listen.	The	chirping	of	the	birds	and	the	wind	passing	through	the	trees
and	the	sound	of	running	water	--	 listen	 to	 it	all.	This	 is	how	God	is	speaking,
giving	his	messages.	He	will	not	come	like	an	Old	Testament	prophet	and	shout
at	you.	He	is	not	a	person,	he	is	a	presence.	And	if	you	are	silent	you	can	feel	the
presence.	There	is	nothing	to	say	but	much	to	feel,	nothing	to	say	but	much	to
listen	 to.	 And	 the	 beautiful	 things	 about	 silence	 is,	 it	 is	 neither	 Christian	 nor
Hindu	nor	Mohammedan.
When	you	are	 listening	you	are	 receptive,	vulnerable,	open.	That	vulnerability,
that	 openness,	 creates	 great	 joy	 in	 you	 because	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 drop	 all
bondages.	At	least	for	the	moment	you	are	out	of	the	prison,	in	the	open,	under
the	sun,	under	the	moon.	for	the	first	time	you	feel	the	wind,	the	sun.	these	are
all	ways	of	contacting	god.
He	 comes	 through	 the	 heart,	 but	 he	 can	 come	 only	 when	 the	 heart	 is	 utterly
silent,	absolutely	still.
God	need	not	be	advised,	and	your	advice	cannot	be	of	any	meaning;	 the	very
effort	 is	 stupid.	 People	 are	 hiding	 their	 desires	 behind	 their	 prayers.	 Their
prayers	 are	 only	 a	 facade;	 they	 want	 to	 snatch	 something	 from	 god.	 There	 is
desire,	and	whenever	there	is	desire,	prayer	disappears.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prayer	means	a	total	acceptance	of	whatsoever	is.	Desire	means	that	something
else	is	needed,	this	is	not	enough,	more	is	needed.	And	when	there	is	the	desire
for	 more,	 how	 can	 you	 be	 silent?	 There	 will	 be	 turmoil	 within.	 There	 are
millions	of	desires,	 so	you	will	be	crowded,	 suffocated.	You	cannot	be	at	 ease
and	 you	 cannot	 be	 at	 rest.	 And	 prayer	 is	 a	 deep	 rest,	 a	 rest	 in	 existence,	 a
relaxation	so	deep	that	you	disappear	totally.
To	be	in	prayer	means	to	be	available	to	god,	to	his	creativity,	to	be	open,	to	be
utterly	silent,	relaxed,	to	be	a	non-being,	so	that	he	can	possess	you.	You	are	so
empty	of	yourself	that	he	is	bound	to	possess	you.
Prayer	is	a	gesture	from	your	side	that	"I	am	ready	to	be	possessed.	I	am	ready	to
be	overwhelmed	--
come	to	me!"	And	that	too	has	not	to	be	said,	that	is	just	a	feeling	in	every	fibre
of	your	body,	mind,	soul.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	A	year.
--	That's	very	good!	Do	many	groups.	And	those	who	come	for	one	year	never
go	back!	(laughter)
--	I	don't	want	to	go	away.
--	There	is	no	need	to	go	--	you	have	come	home!
Mediation	is	the	only	true	prayer.	All	else	that	goes	on	in	the	name	of	prayer	is
mind	stuff.	It	is	utterly	useless.	You	can	go	on	talking	to	God	for	lives	together,
but	you	will	never	be	heard.
Real	prayer	is	not	verbal.	It	has	to	be	out	of	silence.	Silence	is	simply	silence,	it
does	not	belong	 to	any	religion.	 It	certainly	belongs	 to	 the	religious	heart.	 It	 is
the	very	center	of	 the	 religious	heart	but	 it	 is	not	part	of	any	dogma,	doctrine,
church.
A	really	religious	person	is	free	of	all	Christianity,	Judaism,	Jainism,	Buddhism.
Because	 "isms"	 as	 such	 are	 something	 in	 the	 mind.	 They	 are	 ideology,
philosophy,	thinking.	And	thinking	is	never	silent,	thinking	is	a	always	a	turmoil.
Silence	means	a	 thought-less	 stillness.	When	 there	 is	no	 thought	 in	you,	when
nothing	stirs,	you	are	in	prayer.
Because	 meditation	 is	 difficult,	 priests	 all	 over	 the	 world	 invented	 prayers,
prayers	which	can	be	done	by	anybody.	Even	a	small	child	can	be	taught	so	that
he	repeats	them	like	a	parrot	every	night	--	out	of	fear,	because	the	mother	and
the	father,	all	are	after	him:	"Have	you	said	your	prayers	or	not?"	So	he	has	to	do
it,	and	then	it	becomes	a	habit:	when	you	are	grown	up	you	continue	saying	the
same	prayer	every	night.	 If	you	don't	do	 it,	 it	will	be	difficult	 for	you	 to	sleep
because	a	routine	is	missing.	If	you	say	it,	you	gain	nothing.
It	is	just	like	a	habit.	A	few	people	like	to	have	a	cup	of	coffee	before	they	go	to
sleep,	a	few	people	like	to	have	a	little	smoke	before	they	go	to	sleep,	and	a	few
religious	people	like	to	do	some	praying	--	but	it	is	all	the	same!	(laughter)	There
is	no	qualitative	difference,	just	a	routine.	sleep	needs	a	certain	ritual:	make	love,
smoke	a	cigarette	or	jog	or	do	something	else!(laughter)	Even	if	you	enter	your
bed	from	the	wrong	side	you	will	find	it	difficult	to	go	to	sleep.	In	a	new	room	it
is	difficult	to	sleep.	It	takes	at	least	three	days	to	settle	into	a	new	room,	into	a
new	house.
Prayer	 also	 can	 become	 part	 of	 ritual.	 That's	 what	 it	 has	 become	 all	 over	 the
world.	It	is	not	prayer.	It	is	an	invention	of	the	cunning	priest,	a	toy	to	play	with.
Real	prayer	is	meditation.	Meditation	is	hard	work.	You	have	to	transform	much
in	your	being,	you	have	 to	drop	much	 rubbish.	You	have	 to	 empty	your	head,
you	have	to	move	more	and	more	close	to	the	heart.
You	have	to	become	more	silent	and	still.	And	when	you	are	utterly	silent	God
speaks,	not	in	a	certain	language	--	he	has	no	language.	But	through	silence	there
is	 a	 communion.	 It	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 way	 of	 giving	 a	 message.	 You	 start
hearing	the	message;	not	only	that,	you	start	living	the	message.	Once	you	have
heard	 from	God	 in	 you	 deep	 silence,	 you	 have	 to	 follow	 it	 --	 you	 cannot	 do
otherwise,	and	not	out	of	any	sense	of	duty	but	out	of	sheer	joy.	The	more	you
follow	 those	 subtle	 guidelines	 that	 happen	 in	 you	 silence,	 the	more	 and	more
your	silence	deepens,	the	more	and	more	you	become	available	to	God.	He	can
communicate	more.	 Then	meditation	 becomes	 your	 very	 being.	 Then	 it	 is	 not
something	special	to	do,	it	becomes	your	ordinary	life.
Cooking,	 you	 are	meditatively	 cooking,	 taking	 a	 shower,	 you	 are	meditatively
taking	 a	 shower.	 Even	 while	 sleeping	 you	 are	 meditatively	 sleeping.	 When
meditation	 has	 become	 just	 like	 breathing	 or	 the	 heart	 beating,	 then	 you	 have
come	home.
Praise	is	the	very	essence	of	prayer.	If	you	can	praise	life	and	all	its	gift	you	are
bound	to	encounter	god.
People	 only	 condemn,	 their	 very	 being	 is	 negative.	 They	 are	 very	 vocal	 in
negating,	in	saying	no,	in	condemning.	And	not	only	the	ordinary	people	but	the
so-called	religious	people	are	also	condemnors,	they	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
are	great	poisoners.	They	don't	teach	people	how	to	praise	life	and	its	blessings,
they	teach	people	how	to	condemn	life,	how	to	negate	life.	Their	idea	of	God	is
that	he	is	an	enemy	of	life.	On	one	hand	they	go	on	saying	that	God	created	life,
on	 the	other	hand	 they	go	on	 teaching	people	 to	 renounce	 life.	This	 is	such	an
absurdity,	 but	 it	 has	 been	 perpetuated	 for	 so	 long	 that	 nobody	 sees	 its
contradiction.
If	God	created	life	then	it	can't	be	renounced.	To	renounce	it	will	be	to	renounce
God	 himself.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 that	 George	 Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 to	 his
disciples	 that	 all	 the	 saints	 are	 against	 God.	 His	 statement	 has	 tremendous
significance.	The	saints	 teach	people	 to	go	away	from	life.	That	can't	be	God's
intention.	If	he	creates	life	and	he	goes	on	creating	it,	that	means	that	he	wants
you	to	live	it	in	its	totality.
He	 wants	 you	 to	 live	 it	 with	 gusto,	 with	 fervour,	 with	 joy.	 He	 wants	 you	 to
transform	life	into	a	love	affair.
and	that's	what	praise	is.
Look	at	the	stars,	at	the	sun,	at	the	trees,	at	the	people.	We	are	living	in	such	a
wonderful	world	but	we	are	 so	blind	and	so	deaf	 that	we	don't	hear	 the	music
that	surrounds	us	and	we	don't	see	the	beauty	that	is	constantly	showering	on	us.
And	when	we	start	seeing	it,	praise	arises,	silent	praise.	Nothing	has	to	be	said	in
particular.	What	can	be	said?	--	all	words	are	inadequate.	But	one	bows	down	in
silence,	in	gratitude.
That	is	prayer.
Prayer	is	neither	Hindu	nor	Mohammedan	nor	Christian.	How	can	it	be	Hindu,
Mohammedan,	Christian?	 It	 is	 just	 the	 silent,	 singing	heart,	 full	 of	 joy,	 full	 of
thankfulness.
Praise	is	the	very	foundation	of	prayer.	One	who	can	praise	has	a	heart	ready	to
jump	into	prayer.
It	 is	 difficult	 to	 praise,	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 condemn.	 It	 is	 easy	 to	 condemn	 because
through	 condemnation	 the	 ego	 feels	 nourished.	 Through	 condemnation	 you
reduce	 people	 to	 being	 lower	 than	 you,	 you	 become	 higher,	 holier,	 superior.
That's	how	the	ego	exists,	it	always	reduces	everybody	to	a	lower	status.
Praise	means	 raising	 the	other	higher	 than	you.	 It	 is	poison	 for	 the	ego.	When
you	praise	each	and	everything,	when	the	whole	universe	becomes	an	object	of
your	 praise,	 the	 ego	 disappears.	And	 the	 disappearance	 of	 the	 ego	makes	 you
available	 to	god.	Only	when	 the	ego	has	completely	gone	can	God	descend	 in
you.	The	ego	has	to	vacate	the	heart,	only	then	can	God	enter	in.
God	simply	means	the	whole.	Ego	means	you	are	trying......
[page	missing?....195]
....	 is	 in	gambling.	When	he	 risks,	 time	 stops	 for	him,	mind	 stops	 for	him,	his
heart	misses	a	beat.	For	a	moment	it	is	as	if	the	whole	world	stops,	everything	is
in	a	suspense.	That	is	his	joy.	In	that	suspense	he	unknowingly	tastes	something
of	meditation.
We	 are	 doing	 it	 here	 very	 knowingly,	 deliberately.	 I	 am	 teaching	 you	 to	 be
gamblers....	not	in	the	ordinary	sense,	I	am	not	asking	you	to	risk	your	money.	I
am	 asking	 you	 to	 risk	 your	 life	 and	 to	 risk	 it	 for	 the	 unknown.	 There	 is	 no
guarantee,	there	can	never	be	any	guarantee	for	it,	because	if	there	is	a	guarantee
it	is	business.	It	is	no	more	gambling.
Worship	means	 risking	all	 that	you	have	 for	 the	 search	of	what	 it	 is	 all	 about.
This	mysterious	universe,	this	infinite	existence,	this	beginningless,	endless	life	-
-	what	is	it	all	about?
God	 is	 only	 a	 name	 for	 all	 this,	 for	 this	 totality.	 If	 it	 is	 only	 curiosity	 one
becomes	 a	 philosopher.	 If	 it	 is	 only	 a	 ritual	 one	 becomes	 a	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan.	But	if	it	is	a	deep	love	affair	then	one	becomes	a	sannyasin.
Worship	can	be	out	of	fear	or	out	of	greed	but	then	it	is	not	worship	at	all.	That	is
what	 is	 know	 to	 people	 as	 worship.	 In	 the	 temples,	 in	 the	 mosques,	 in	 the
churches,	in	the	synagogues	you	will	find	people	who	are	either	afraid	or	greedy.
It	 is	 very	 rare	 to	 come	 to	 the	 third	 category	 because	 the	 third	 category	 rarely
exists.	 The	 third	 category	 consists	 of	 those	 people	 who	 worship	 just	 out	 of
gratitude,	because	god	has	given	so	much.	They	don't	desire	any	more,	they	are
not	greedy.	They	are	not	afraid.	How	can	they	be	afraid	when	god	exists?	How
can	there	be	hell	when	God	is?	It	is	impossible,	God	and	hell	don't	fit.	All	those
tortures	of	hell	 simply	prove	 that	 there	 is	no	god.	 If	 hell	 is	 a	 reality	 then	God
must	be	unreal.	Then	devil	is	a	reality.	The	devil	fits	perfectly	well	with	hell.	If
God	is,	then	there	is	no	hell.	That	is	enough	proof	that	hell	does	not	exist.
But	 this	 is	 strange,	a	very	strange	phenomenon,	 that	people	have	been	arguing
against	God	but	nobody	has	argues	against	hell.	I	have	come	across	thousands	of
books	which	argue	against	God	saying	that	there	is	no	God.	but	I	have	not	come
across	 a	 single	 book	 which	 argues	 that	 there	 is	 no	 hell	 or	 which	 argues	 that
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
there	is	no	devil.	It	appears	very	strange	but	when	you	give	it	a	second	thought	it
has	a	certain	 logic:	we	are	 so	miserable	 that	we	can	accept	hell	 easily.	We	are
already	in	hell,	how	can	we	disprove	it?	And	we	are	surrounded	by	all	kinds	of
evil	 forces.	 We	 have	 created	 them,	 we	 have	 released	 them.	 Adolf	 Hitler	 and
Joseph	 Stalin	 and	Mao	 Tse	 Tung	 are	 enough	 proof	 that	 the	 devil	 exists.	 Our
world	is	enough	proof	that	there	is	hell,	and	certainly	hell	will	need	somebody	to
control,	 to	 dominate,	 to	 rule	 over	 it;	 hence	 nobody	 says	 that	 there	 is	 no	 hell,
nobody	says	that	there	is	no	devil,	but	thousands	of	people	have	argues	against
God.
The	real	worshipper	 is	one	who	 looks	at	 the	beauty	of	existence.	Although	we
have	contaminated	everything,	still	 it	 is	beautiful;	we	have	not	been	successful
although	we	have	destroyed	much	we	cannot	destroy	the	whole.	Still	the	beauty
lingers,	still	trees	dance	and	birds	sing	and	stars	go	on	showering	light,	life.	And
the	 celebration	 continues,	 only	man	 has	 been	 lagging	 behind.	 He	 has	 become
heavy	and	he	is	no	more	part	of	the	celebration	of	existence.
The	real	worshipper	is	one	who	becomes	part	of	this	celebration.	He	dances	with
the	trees,	he	sings	with	the	birds.	He	is	blissful	and	grateful;	out	of	his	bliss	he	is
bound	to	be	grateful.
So	 I	don't	 teach	you	God,	 I	 teach	you	bliss,	because	 this	 is	my	observation:	 if
you	are	blissful	then	you	are	bound	to	be	grateful	to	God,	then	you	are	bound	to
find	God.	You	cannot	avoid	it,	it	is	inevitable.	To	the	blissful	heart	God	simply
happens.
So	worship	has	neither	to	be	out	of	fear	nor	out	of	greed,	but	out	of	bliss.	Then	it
is	true	and	it	has	a	tremendous	beauty	of	its	own.	It	brings	freedom.
Religion	has	to	be	a	conscious	decision	because	it	is	going	to	be	a	commitment.
For	example,	you	are	entering	into	sannyas,	this	is	religion,	this	is	your	decision.
This	is	not	out	of	any	conditioning.	This	is	falling	in	love!
Now	worship	becomes	possible.	And	when	I	say	worship	I	don't	mean	that	you
have	to	worship	a	certain	statue	with	certain	prayers.	By	worship	I	simply	mean
looking	at	existence	with	worshipful	eyes,	eyes	full	of	wonder	and	awe,	with	a
heart	 full	 of	 praise.	 To	 look	 at	 existence	 with	 wonder	 and	 awe	 is	 worship,
because	through	that	wonder	and	awe	one	starts	feeling	the	presence	of	God.
And	once	you	 start	 feeling	 the	presence	of	God	 then	nothing	can	 take	 it	 away
from	 you.	 No	 argument,	 no	 proofs,	 no	 logic	 can	 take	 it	 away	 from	 you.	 It
becomes	your	authentic	experience,	nobody	can	destroy	it.
It	becomes	your	very	foundation.	And	for	 the	first	 time	you	know	that	you	are
not	 an	 accident,	 that	 you	 are	 intrinsically	 related	 to	 existence,	 that	 existence
needs	you	as	much	as	you	need	existence,	 that	you	are	not	 really	 separate	but
interdependent.
To	feel	that	is	to	be	blissful.	To	feel	that	is	to	rejoice.
Daso	means	servant	--	servant	of	God,	one	who	is	ready	to	serve	existence,	one
who	is	ready	to	worship	God	through	service.	All	other	worship	is	mere	ritual.
Real	worship	is	service.	Service	is	pouring	your	love	wherever	it	is	needed	--	on
the	 trees,	 on	 the	 rocks,	 on	 animals,	 on	 human	 beings.	 Everybody	 has	 an
inexhaustible	source	of	love	--	and	love	is	a	healing	force.	So	wherever	you	find
any	 suffering,	 pour	 your	 love,	 shower	 you	 love.	 You	 will	 be	 surprised,	 love
heals.	And	love	heals	not	only	the	person	you	shower	it	upon,	it	heals	you	too,
simultaneously.
When	 you	 see	 somebody	 becoming	 whole	 a	 great	 joy	 arises	 in	 you.	 Even	 in
seeing	the	seeds	that	you	have	sown	in	the	soil	growing	up,	and	becoming	plants
something	inside	you	also	starts	growing	with	them.
That's	 the	beauty	of	creativity:	 it	creates	something	on	the	outside	about	which
the	whole	world	knows,	it	creates	something	in	the	inside	of	which	only	you	are
aware.	And	the	inner	is	the	real,	the	more	precious.
The	outer	is	only	a	spin-off,	a	by-product.
Service	 is	 creativity.	 and	 by	 serving	 existence	 one	 comes	 closer	 to	 God,
otherwise	there	is	no	way	to	come	close	to	him.	Love,	be	compassionate,	share
whatsoever	you	have.	Share	your	very	being	and	don't	be	a	miser.	That's	the	way
of	sannyas.	You	may	not	go	to	the	church	and	you	may	not	go	to	the	temple	but
God	is	bound	to	happen	to	you.	He	is	going	to	come	to	you,	you	need	not	worry.
He	always	comes	to	the	person	who	has	fulfilled	the	basic	requirement,	and	the
basic	requirement	is	unconditional	love.	That's	what	I	mean	by	service.
To	be	blissful	is	the	only	true	prayer.	there	is	no	need	to	ask	anything	from	god,
he	already	knows.	all	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is	a	blissful	surrender.	Joyously
we	should	surrender	ourselves	to	god.	and	that	is	enough,	then	god	starts	taking
care.	He	is	very	caring	but	we	don't	allow	him	to	take	care	of	us.
Sannyas	means	 leaving	everything	 to	God,	and	whatsoever	happens	--	good	or
bad,	pain	or	pleasure	--
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
always	feeling	grateful	for	it.
There	 is	 no	 other	 prayer	 than	 love.	 All	 other	 prayers	 are	 false	 substitutes.
Christian,	 Hindu,	 Mohammedan	 --	 all	 prayers	 are	 just	 toys.	 Man	 has	 been
deprived	of	love	so	he	has	been	supplied	by	the	society,	the	church,	the	state	with
some	false	toys.
It	 is	 just	 like	 when	 a	 child	 is	 deprived	 of	 the	 mother's	 breast	 we	 give	 him
something	false,	a	rubber	breast.	And	the	child	is	deceived,	he	goes	on	sucking
on	the	rubber	thing.	But	a	child	can	be	forgiven,	a	child	is	after	all	a	child;	he	is
not	aware	of	the	cunningness	of	grown-up	people.
But	as	far	as	reality	is	concerned	we	are	all	deceived.	Prayer	has	been	given	to	us
just	 as	 a	 substitute	 because	 love	 has	 been	 taken	 away.	 Something	 is	 needed,
because	 love	 is	 a	 basic	 need:	 so	 don't	 love	 human	 beings;	 love	 God,	 love
humanity.	Now	where	is	humanity?	You	will	never	come	across	humanity.
Whenever	you	meet	it	you	will	meet	a	human	being.	Don't	love	human	beings;
love	 humanity,	 an	 abstraction.	 Don't	 love	 the	 world,	 the	 concrete	 world;	 love
God,	an	abstraction.	And	we	call	this	love	for	abstractions,	prayer.
My	effort	here	is	to	bring	prayer	back	to	its	reality,	back	to	the	earth,	back	to	the
concrete.	the	abstract	has	exploited	man	too	long	and	too	much.	we	have	to	get
rid	of	great	abstract	words	--	humanity,	freedom,	communism,	God,	Christianity
--	just	words.
Love	 the	 concrete:	 human	 beings,	 animals,	 trees,	 birds.	 Love	 the	 real	 that	 is
prayer.	 The	 whole	 universe	 is	 his	 temple.	 Love	more	 and	more	 and	 you	 will
become	more	and	more	religious.	You	will	not	become	a	Christian	and	you	will
not	become	a	Hindu;	you	will	become	more	and	more	religious.
Religion	has	nothing	to	do	with	all	these	isms.	Religion	is	a	quality	of	the	heart.
A	heart	which	is	overflowing	with	love,	that	is	what	true	religiousness	is.
[An	 interview	 follows	with	Ma	 Prem	Divya,	ms	 pg	 200-202,	 about	 prayer,	 in
verses,	which	is	not	included	here.]
Meditation	is	the	greatest	adventure	in	life,	because	it	is	easier	to	go	out	--	all	our
senses	are	out-going	--
it	is	difficult	to	come	in.	To	come	in	means	transcending	nature,	transcending	the
ordinary	 laws	 of	 nature.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 conquest.	One	 has	 to	 be	 a	masterful
warrior.
The	fight	is	with	one's	own	consciousness,	with	one's	own	darkness,	with	one's
own	lethargy,	sleep,	inattentiveness	--	in	short,	with	one's	own	mind.
It	 is	 easy	 to	 fight	 with	 somebody	 else	 because	 you	 can	 see	 the	 enemy	 there,
outside,	 you	 can	 define	 the	 enemy.	 The	mind	 is	 so	 close	 to	 you	 that	 you	 feel
almost	 one	 with	 it;	 hence	 the	 difficulty.	 The	 first	 step	 is	 to	 create	 a	 distance
between	you	and	your	mind	so	that	your	mind	is	also	separate	from	you.	Then
the	fight	starts.
It	is	a	very	non-violent	fight.	It	is	more	of	a	transformation	than	a	fight,	because
we	are	not	going	to	destroy	the	mind,	we	are	going	to	use	the	mind	as	a	stepping
stone	towards	the	state	of	no-mind.	But	still	in	the	beginning	it	looks	like	a	fight,
and	one	has	to	be	very	very	alert,	intelligent.	Only	then	is	there	a	possibility	of
winning	over	it,	of	becoming	victorious.
Sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	a	great	adventure,	the	greatest	in	life.
Bliss	happens	only	to	those	who	know	what	loyalty	is.	Bliss	happens	only	in	the
heart,	never	in	the	head.
The	 head	 is	 like	 a	 desert:	 nothing	 grows	 there.	 It	 is	 only	 in	 the	 heart	 that
everything	 that	 is	 of	 any	 value	 grows	 --	 love,	 meditation,	 God,	 bliss,	 peace,
silence.	Anything	that	has	any	value,	any	eternal	value,	grows	in	the	heart.	But
the	functioning	of	the	heart	and	the	head	are	totally	opposed	to	each	other.	And
we	are	trained	for	the	head	--	that	becomes	a	problem.
The	head	is	based	on	doubt	and	the	heart	is	based	on	trust.	Our	whole	training	is
of	 doubting,	 thinking,	 suspecting,	 questioning.	And	 that	 is	 not	 the	way	 of	 the
heart;	hence	we	remain	hung-up	in	the	head.	There	are	very	few	people	on	the
earth	who	know	 that	 the	 heart	 exists.	 For	 others	 it	 is	 only	 a	metaphor,	 poetry,
fiction,	not	fact;	at	the	most	just	a	pumping	mechanism	for	the	blood.	But	that	is
not	the	heart	that	mystics	have	been	talking	about.
There	 is	 a	 center	 deep	 down	 inside	 you,	 but	 that	 center	 can	 only	 be	 known
through	trust.	Sannyas	is	a	jump	into	trust.	It	is	getting	involved	in	a	love	affair,
a	love	affair	with	God	himself.	Less	than	that	is	of	no	use.	Only	a	love	affair	can
help.
The	head	will	say	that	this	is	blind	trust	and	it	will	condemn	it	in	every	possible
way.	But	don't	listen	to	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
the	head;	it	is	the	devil	who	speaks	through	the	head.	Listen	to	the	heart	--	that	is
God's	voice.
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	Music
7	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002075
ShortTitle:	WITHME07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Once	the	mind	is	gone
there	is	no	need	of	meditation.
One	is	simply	pure	music,
celestial	music,	sacred	music.
That	music	has	been	called	by	different	names;
Tao,	Dhamma,	God.
Man	is	carrying	within	himself	a	tremendous	capacity	for	music.	when	I	say	man
I	 mean	 every	 man.	 and	 when	 I	 say	 music	 I	 don't	 mean	 ordinary	 music.	 Not
everybody	can	be	a	musician	in	the	ordinary	sense.	Only	few	have	that	talent.	It
is	something	inborn,	innate.
My	 meaning	 of	 music	 is	 totally	 different.	 I	 mean	 the	 inner	 experience	 of
harmony.	 It	 is	 far	 more	 musical	 than	 any	 music	 that	 can	 be	 created.	 It	 is
uncreated	music.	No	instruments	are	needed,	no	training	or	expertise	is	needed.
All	 that	 is	 required	of	you	 to	 listen	 to	 its	deep	silence.	 It	 is	already	 there.	 It	 is
your	very	life.	The	Zen	people	call	it	the	sound	of	one	hand	clapping.
In	ordinary	music	 there	are	always	 two	 things	needed,	only	 then	can	sound	be
created.	 If	 you	 are	 playing	 a	 guitar	 then	 you	 have	 to	 use	 your	 hands	 on	 the
strings.	Only	through	the	tension	created	by	your	fingers	will	 the	strings	create
music.	But	 the	 inner	music	 is	 something	which	 is	 already	 there	 from	 the	 very
beginning.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 your	 heartbeat;	 a	 little	 deeper	 than	 that,	 a	 little	more
mysterious	than	the	heartbeat.
It	is	the	beat	of	your	true	heart.
Man	 has	 two	 hearts.	 One	 belongs	 to	 his	 body,	 the	 other	 belongs	 to	 his	 soul.
When	you	start	hearing	the	heartbeat	of	the	soul,	you	hear	something	which	can
only	be	called	celestrial	music.	And	once	you	have	heard	it	within	yourself	you
will	be	able	to	hear	it	in	the	sound	of	running	water,	in	the	wind	passing	through
the	pine	trees,	in	the	songs	of	the	birds,	in	the	silence	of	the	night	and	even	in	the
noise	of	the	marketplace.
Meditation	 is	 needed	 to	 make	 the	 mind	 silent	 and	 quiet,	 and	 as	 the	 mind
becomes	quiet	the	music	starts	happening	to	you.	It	was	already	happening	but
you	were	not	aware	of	it.	And	once	you	have	heard	it,	it	pulls	you	inwards	like	a
magnet,	it	pulls	you	to	the	very	centre	of	your	being.	And	it	is	there	at	the	very
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
centre	of	your	being	that	all	the	mysteries	are	revealed.
Meditation	 is	 only	 a	 preparation.	Meditation	 is	 an	 antidote	 to	mind.	Mind	 is	 a
disease,	 meditation	 is	 the	 medicine.	 In	 fact	 the	 words	 "meditation"	 and
"medicine"	come	from	the	same	root.	Once	the	mind	is	gone	there	is	no	need	of
meditation	either;	hence	when	meditation	is	perfect	it	ceases	to	be.	Then	one	is
simply	pure	music,	celestial	music,	sacred	music.	That	music	has	been	called	by
different	names:	tao,	dhamma,	god.
Become	a	song	and	you	become	a	sannyasin.	A	song	has	a	few	qualities	which
are	basic	requirements	for	a	sannyasin	too.
The	 first	 quality	 is	 that	 a	 song	 is	 a	 celebration.	 So	 is	 sannyas,	 sannyas	 is	 not
renunciation	but	rejoicing.
The	 second	 quality	 of	 a	 song	 is	 that	 it	 is	 not	 a	 syllogism.	 It	 is	 illogical.	 You
cannot	understand	it	through	logic.	It	is	not	an	argument.	It	neither	tries	to	prove
anything	 nor	 to	 disprove	 anything.	 It	 simply	 rejoices	 for	 no	 reason,	 with	 no
motive	at	all.	It	is	like	the	birds	singing	in	the	early	morning.	A	sannyasin	also
has	to	live	that	kind	of	life.	That	quality	has	to	be	imbibed.
Be	 less	 concerned	 with	 logic	 and	 more	 concerned	 with	 joy.	 A	 logical	 mind
becomes	 joyless,	 because	 joy	 is	 basically	 illogical.	And	 a	 joyful	 person	 drops
logic.	He	has	to	drop	it,	it	is	an	unnecessary	burden.	You	cannot	carry	the	rock	of
logic	and	yet	dance	and	sing.
And	the	third	quality	of	a	song	is	that	it	is	rooted	in	the	heart,	it	comes	out	of	the
source	of	love.	So	does	sannyas,	it	 is	exactly	like	that.	It	 is	rooted	in	the	heart,
not	in	the	head,	and	it	comes	out	of	your	love.	It	is	not	a	conclusion	arrived	at	by
the	mind.	 It	 is	 a	 quantum	 leap,	 a	 jump	 into	 the	 unknown	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of
moving	into	the	unknown,	not	knowing	where	you	are	going,	why	you	are	going,
not	even	bothering	about	where	and	why.
It	 looks	mad	to	 those	who	cling	 to	 logic,	 love	has	always	 looked	mad	to	 those
people.	But	love	is	a	madness	which	is	a	higher	kind	of	sanity,	because	it	is	only
through	love	that	one	achieves	God.
Anugito	means	a	small	song.
My	sannyas	is	not	a	serious	affair.	In	the	past	monks	and	nuns	and	all	kinds	of
religious	people	have	been	very	serious.	Their	seriousness	destroyed	religion	on
the	earth,	their	seriousness	was	like	a	heavy	rock.
My	sannyas	is	like	a	weightless	flower:	you	have	to	know	how	to	love,	how	to
sing,	how	tod	dance,	because	only	through	learning	to	celebrate	does	one	come
across	the	divine.	The	serious	person	never	knows	God,	can	never	know.
God	 is	not	serious	at	all.	You	may	meet	him	in	deep	 laughter	but	you	will	not
meet	him	in	seriousness.
You	may	meet	him	in	dancing,	in	singing,	but	you	will	not	meet	him	if	you	are
sad,	heavy,	long-faced.
So	be	light-footed,	be	light,	just	like	a	flower,	weightless,	as	if	gravitation	has	no
effect	upon	you.	Be	light-hearted,	take	life	as	fun.	That	is	the	most	fundamental
thing	 about	my	 sannyas.	And	 then	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 become	 a	 small	 song,	 a
song	that	can	be	offered	to	God.
Anandgit	means	a	bliss	song.
Remember	 one	 thing,	 that	 seriousness	 is	 a	 disease.	 And	 religion	 has	 been	 ill
because	off	serious	people.
We	 have	 to	 introduce	 a	 little	 playfulness	 into	 religion,	 a	 little	 drama	 into	 the
churches,	 a	 little	 colourfulness,	 a	 little	 poetry.	 Churches	 have	 almost	 become
cemeteries.	Temples	are	so	dead	that	it	is	impossible	for	God	to	exist	there.	He
may	 still	 exist	 in	 the	mountains,	 in	 the	 forests,	 in	 animals,	 in	 people,	 but	 the
temples	and	the	mosques	and	the	churches	seem	to	be	the	last	places	where	you
will	find	him.
The	 reason	 is	 that	 all	 these	 places	 have	 been	 dominated	 by	 ill	 people,
pathological	 people.	 My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 a	 totally	 new	 kind	 of
religiousness;	a	 religion	 that	can	sing,	a	 religion	 that	can	dance,	a	 religion	 that
can	love,	a	religion	that	can	celebrate.
And	each	of	my	sannyasins	has	to	become	a	proof	of	it.
One	has	to	become	joy	and	one	has	to	learn	to	keep	oneself	joyous	in	spite	of	the
circumstances.	That's	the	whole	art,	the	true	art	of	being	in	life	and	yet	above	it.
One	 should	 be	 able	 to	 dance,	 to	 sing,	 to	 celebrate	 and	 yet	 remain	 centred.
Nothing	should	be	capable	of	distracting	you	from	your	centre.	Every	experience
of	life	should	be	used	as	a	stepping	stone	to	become	more	centred.
In	 pain,	 be	 centred;	 know	 perfectly	well	 that	 it	will	 pass	 away,	 so	 there	 is	 no
need	to	be	worried.
Everything	passes	away.	Keep	cool.	And	when	happiness	arrives,	don't	become
too	 excited.	 That	 too	 is	 going	 to	 pass	 away.	 In	 life	 nothing	 remains,	 nothing
abides.	Everything	goes	on	passing.	Life	is	a	flux.	But	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	 awareness	 remains	 the	 same,	 it	 is	 always	 the	 same.	 It	 is	 the	 only	 eternal
thing	in	existence.
As	you	become	more	and	more	watchful	of	life's	fluxes,	changes,	slowly	slowly
you	 become	 aware	 of	 something	 inside	 you,	 that	 in	 contrast	 to	 life	 is	 never
changing.	 That	 moment	 is	 the	 explosion	 of	 light,	 of	 love,	 of	 joy.	 Then	 one
becomes	a	song.	And	only	if	we	become	a	song	can	we	offer	something	to	God.
If	we	 bloom	 like	 a	 flower	 then	we	 can	 offer	 ourselves	 to	God.	Otherwise	we
have	nothing,	we	have	nothing,	we	are	just	empty,	hollow,	full	of	rubbish.
But	 that	 need	 not	 be	 so.	 The	 rubbish	 can	 be	 transformed,	 it	 can	 be	 used	 as
manure.	That's	what	we	are	doing	here:	we	use	everybody's	rubbish	as	manure	to
grow	flowers!
Sannyas	 is	a	 love	affair.	 It	 is	not	 religious	 in	 the	ordinary	sense.	 It	 is	 far	more
poetic,	far	more	lyrical,	far	more	musical.	It	is	more	of	an	art	than	the	so-called
religions.	 It	 is	not	 like	 christianity,	Hinduism,	Mohammedanism.	 It	 is	 a	 totally
new	phenomenon,	it	is	a	new	beginning.	It	has	no	tradition,	it	has	no	past.	It	is	a
new	dawn.
And	my	message	is	of	love.
Jesus	says	that	God	is	love	and	I	say	that	love	is	God.	That's	where	we	agree	and
that's	where	we	differ	too.	My	sannyasins	love	to	become	love	songs,	they	have
to	become	lovebirds!	If	you	start	being	a	song,	a	dance,	only	then	will	you	know
the	alchemy	of	sannyas,	how	it	transforms	you,	how	easily,	without	any	fuss,	it
brings	purity	to	you,	innocence	to	you.	You	become	a	saint,	a	sage,	but	without
any	 fuss.	You	don't	 become	a	pious	 egoist,	 you	don't	 start	 proclaiming	 "	 I	 am
holier	than	others."	You	don't	know	anything	about	holiness.	All	that	you	know
is	that	you	love	life	and	that	you	love	life	wholly,	totally.
That	is	real	worship	and	real	prayer:	to	love	life	totally,	unconditionally,	to	enjoy
each	moment	as	a	gift	of	God,	with	gratitude,	with	thankfulness.
If	one	can	sing	a	little,	if	one	can	share	one's	joy	a	little,	if	one	can	express	one's
being	a	little,	that's	enough,	in	fact	more	than	enough.
We	are	very	miserly,	we	don't	share.	This	is	the	greatest	calamity	that	can	happen
to	any	man,	and	this	has	happened	to	the	whole	of	humanity:	we	are	brought	up
in	such	a	way	that	we	become	miserly.	Even	if	we	give,	we	give	very	grudgingly.
and	whenever	we	give,	we	give	only	on	business	terms,	it	is	not	sharing.
We	give	only	to	get	more,	it	is	always	a	bargain.	That	is	not	true	giving.
True	giving	means	the	sheer	 joy	of	giving,	with	no	motivation,	not	as	a	means
but	as	an	end	unto	itself.
Then	 life	 becomes	 a	 song.	 If	 you	 can	 love	 for	 no	 reason	 at	 all,	 if	 you	 can	 be
friendly	 even	 to	 strangers...	 and	 all	 are	 strangers.	 You	may	 have	 lived	with	 a
person	 for	 ten	 years	 but	 still,	 two	 strangers	 have	 lived	 together	 for	 ten	 years,
that's	all.	But	the	strangeness	never	disappears,	there	is	no	way	to	destroy	it.	And
it	 is	 good	 because	 it	 gives	 individuality	 to	 each	 person,	 uniqueness,
unpredictability.
Give	whole-heartedly	as	much	as	you	can.	That's	what	I	mean	by	a	little	song.
Don't	hold	it	in,	express	it.	Just	like	the	birds	in	the	morning:	the	birds	don't	care
whether	anybody	is	listening	or	not,	they	don't	care	about	the	audience,	they	are
not	singing	to	get	something	in	return.	They	are	simply	singing	out	of	joy.	The
sun	 has	 risen,	 the	morning	 has	 come	 again,	 the	 night	 is	 over,	 and	 they	 are	 all
song,	they	are	all	dance.
This	is	the	real	way	to	live,	each	moment	rejoicing,	rejoicing	in	life,	and	sharing
with	whomsoever	you	happen	to	be.	with	a	tree,	with	an	animal,	with	a	rock	--
share.
If	sharing	becomes	your	life,	you	have	become	a	sannyasin.	If	singing	becomes
your	 life,	 you	 have	 become	 a	 sannyasin.	My	 sannyas	 is	 not	 renunciation,	 it	 is
rejoicing.
Son	Dra?	Come	here.	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?
--	It	has	no	meaning.
--	It	seems	to	be	invented.
--	It's	very	inventive!
--	Mm	mm.	It	sounds	beautiful.	It	has	music	in	it,	but	no	meaning...
--	No.
...	And	that's	good.	Life	needs	music,	not	meaning!
All	meaning	 is	 arbitrary.	We	give	 it	 to	words,	words	 in	 themselves	 don't	 have
any	meaning	 at	 all.	 That's	 why	 there	 are	 so	many	 languages,	 different	 people
have	 decided	 to	 give	 different	 meanings.	 Sometimes	 different	 languages	 give
different	meaning	to	the	same	word.
There	 are	 three	 thousand	 languages	 on	 the	 earth.	 That	 is	 enough	 proof	 that
language	is	an	invented	phenomenon,	it	has	nothing	natural	about	it.	It	is	just	a
social	contract.	We	decide	that	we	are	going	to	mean	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
this	by	this	word.	It	is	a	contract.	We	can	change	the	contract	any	moment;	hence
words	 go	 on	 changing	 their	 meaning.	 Fashions	 change,	 words	 change	 their
meaning.	 Times	 change	 and	 words	 change	 their	 meaning.	 Sometimes	 a	 word
which	has	 seen	 a	peak,	 falls	 down	 into	 a	dark	valley,	 loses	 all	 glory,	 becomes
ugly	and	vice	versa:	 a	word	 that	was	never	 thought	 to	be	beautiful,	was	never
respectable,	 becomes	 fashionable,	 becomes	 an	 "in"	 thing	 and	 this	 goes	 on
happening.
But	music	is	natural,	it	is	not	arbitrary.	One	should	listen	more	to	the	music	than
to	 the	meaning.	 The	wind	 passing	 through	 the	 pine	 trees	 has	 no	meaning	 but
tremendous	music.	The	sound	of	running	water	has	no	meaning	but	great	music.
So	it	is	perfectly	beautiful	that	it	has	no	meaning.	Make	your	life	the	same.	drop
the	source	of	meanings,	the	mind,	and	start	living	through	the	heart	from	where
all	 music	 arises.	 Mathematics	 is	 of	 the	 mind,	 music	 is	 of	 the	 heart	 and	 one
should	live	more	according	to	music	than	according	to	mathematics.
Mathematics	 is	 utilitarian.	 It	 is	 good	 as	 far	 as	 it	 goes	 but	 is	 does	 not	 go	 far
enough,	 it	 goes	 only	 to	 the	marketplace,	 but	music	 goes	 far.	 It	 reaches	 to	 the
ultimate.
All	the	mystics	of	the	world	have	experienced	God	as	sound.	The	zen	people	call
it	 the	 sound	 of	 one	 hand	 clapping.	 In	 India	 the	 mystics	 have	 called	 it	 the
soundless	sound	because	its	very	nature	is	silence.	But	the	silence	is	not	empty,	it
is	 full	 of	music.	 It	 is	 a	 strange	 experience.	All	 is	 silent	 and	 yet	 full	 of	music,
melody.
We	 have	 to	 become	 just	 hollow	 bamboos	 so	 that	 God	 can	 transform	 us	 into
flutes.	 The	 song	 is	 always	 his,	we	 can	 only	 be	 the	mediums.	 The	 song	 is	 not
ours.	All	is	his,	we	too	are	his.
You	 have	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 a	 vehicle	 so	 that	God	 can	 filter	 through	 you	 into	 the
world,	 so	 that	God	 can	 radiate	 through	 you	 into	 the	world.	We	 are	 so	 full	 of
ourselves,	that's	why	we	are	so	empty	of	God.	Just	be	empty	of	yourself	and	you
will	be	full	of	God.	And	then	life	becomes	a	song,	a	joy,	a	tremendously	joyous
phenomenon.	Even	death	becomes	a	song	--	what	to	say	about	life?	even	death
becomes	a	celebration.
[ms	 pages	 213-217	 Interview	with	Swami	Vedam	about	music.	And	ms	 pages
218-221	Interview	with	Ma	Anand	Gayan	about	dancing.	These	 interviews	are
not	included	here.]
When	 the	 turmoil	 of	 the	 thoughts	 completely	 ceases,	 everything	 is	 absolutely
clear.	You	know	that	this	is	the	door	and	this	is	the	wall;	there	is	no	question	of
choice	left.	When	one	is	absolutely	silent	everything	is	so	clear	that	there	is	no
alternative,	there	is	no	question	of	choosing	whether	to	go	out	through	the	wall
or	through	the	door;	you	know	the	door,	so	you	go	out	through	it.
It	is	in	our	blindness	that	we	try	to	pass	through	the	wall	and	we	stumble	and	we
hurt	 ourselves	 and	 we	 hurt	 others.	 In	 our	 blindness	 we	 go	 on	 asking	 people,
"Where	is	the	door?"	And	in	our	blindness	we	cannot	believe	--	even	if	the	door
is	in	front	of	us	we	cannot	see	it.
Wisdom	 simply	 means	 'silence	 in	 action,	 meditation	 in	 action.'	 Meditation	 is
inactive,	 it	 is	 an	 inner	 experience.	 You	 feel	 centered,	 blissfully	 centered,
absolutely	 joyous.	 Now	 when	 you	 act	 out	 of	 this	 joy,	 this	 centering,	 this
integration,	your	 life	becomes	 full	of	wisdom.	You	act	 rightly,	your	action	has
beauty,	your	action	has	grace,	your	action	never	goes	wrong.
It	 is	 impossible	 for	 a	 man	 of	 meditation	 to	 do	 anything	 wrong,	 just	 as	 it	 is
impossible	for	a	man	who	has	no	experience	of	meditation	to	do	anything	right.
He	only	gropes	in	darkness.	Even	if	sometimes	he	does	something	right,	he	does
it	 for	 the	wrong	 reasons,	 his	motives	 are	wrong.	And	 his	motives,	 if	 they	 are
wrong,	destroy	the	whole	beauty	of	the	action.
He	 loves,	but	his	 love	becomes	domination,	possessiveness,	 jealousy.	He	helps
people,	 but	 his	 help,	 his	 service	 becomes	 egoistic.	 He	 thinks	 himself	 very
special,	a	great	servant	of	the	masses,	of	the	people,	of	humanity.	Even	if	he	does
something	right	it	comes	out	wrong,	because	deep	at	his	very	core	he	is	wrong.
Right	 cannot	 grow	 out	 of	 a	wrong	 heart.	 The	 flower	 of	 right	 can	 bloom	 only
when	it	is	rooted	in	silence,	in	awareness,	in	sensitivity,	in	love.
And	 that	 whole	 spectrum	 is	 implied	 by	 the	 word	 'meditation'.	 It	 is	 love,	 it	 is
awareness,	 it	 is	silence,	 it	 is	spontaneity,	 it	 is	sensitivity.	These	are	all	 faces	of
meditation,	facets	of	meditation.
Without	 contributing	 to	 life	 nobody	 can	 ever	 feel	 blissful.	 So	 many	 people
search	for	bliss	but	they	fail	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	uncreative.	They
don't	create	anything.
There	is	one	joy	and	only	one	joy	in	the	world,	and	that	is	of	creating	something,
whatsoever	it	is:	a	poem,	a	song,	a	little	music...	whatsoever	it	is.	But	unless	you
create	something,	you	will	not	feel	fulfilled.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Only	by	creating	something	do	you	participate	in	God's	being.
God	is	 the	creator	of	 the	whole,	and	when	you	create	a	small	 thing,	 in	a	small
way	you	become	part	of	God.	That's	the	only	way	to	bridge	the	gap	between	you
and	God.	No	other	prayer	is	going	to	help,	no	ritual	is	of	any	significance.	They
are	just	deceptive	strategies	invented	by	clever	and	cunning	priests.
The	real	prayer	is	to	be	creative.	But	how	can	you	create	if	you	don't	know	what
your	potential	is,	if	you	don't	know	in	what	direction	you	have	to	move	so	that
you	can	be	creative	and	can	attain	fulfillment?
The	work	of	meditation	is	simply	to	make	you	aware	of	your	own	potential.	 It
simply	throws	light	inside	you,	it	focuses	light	on	your	inner	being	so	that	you
can	read	the	message.
Mind	is	always	tense	because	it	is	always	in	a	state	of	worrying.	It	is	worrying
about	the	past;	although	it	cannot	do	anything	about	it,	still	it	goes	on	worrying.
It	goes	on	thinking	"Had	I	done	this,	had	I	said	this,	had	things	been	like	this..."
Now	there	is	no	way	to	do	anything,	and	still	it	goes	on	worrying.	Worrying	is
mind's	nature,	its	fundamental	quality.
Knowing	the	futility	of	it,	still	it	continues	worrying.	It	worries	about	the	future
which	nobody	knows;	what	is	going	to	happen	next	moment	is	unknown.	And	it
goes	on	thinking	for	years	ahead...	not	only	for	years,	for	lives,	even	about	life
after	death	"What	is	going	to	happen	to	me	after	death?"	It	goes	on	worrying.
Mind	remains	in	a	constant	tension,	and	we	are	so	identified	with	the	mind	that
we	 are	 affected	 by	 the	 tension,	 it	 is	 reflected	 in	 our	 being.	 This	 tension	 is	 a
dissipation	of	 energy,	 this	 tension	 creates	 a	 state	 of	 insanity.	 It	 does	 not	 allow
you	to	see	things	as	they	are,	it	does	not	allow	you	to	see	that	which	is,	it	does
not	allow	you	to	be	in	the	present.
The	only	way	to	get	out	of	the	mind	is	to	relax	totally.	The	moment	you	relax,
you	 slip	out	 of	 the	mind	 and	you	 start	moving	 towards	 the	heart.	The	heart	 is
intrinsically	relaxed,	just	as	the	mind	is	 intrinsically	tense.	The	heart	knows	no
worry.	 It	never	 thinks	about	 the	past,	 it	never	 thinks	about	 the	 future.	 It	 thinks
not,	it	simply	lives.	It	lives	in	the	present.	The	present	belongs	to	the	heart,	and
the	moment	you	are	relaxed	you	are	in	the	present.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about,	to	be	in	the	present,	relaxed,	at	rest,	at	home.
Then	you	know	what	bliss	is,	what	peace	is,	and	ultimately	what	truth	is.
Relaxation	 is	 the	 shortest	 route	 to	 god,	 the	 short-cut	 to	 total	 freedom,	 to
liberation.
It	is	through	meditation	that	one	becomes	noble.	Nobility	has	nothing	to	do	with
your	birth;	in	fact	royal	families	have	been	more	ignoble	than	anybody	else.	The
whole	 of	 history	 is	 full	 of	 the	 crimes	 of	 the	 royal	 families.	 In	 fact	 the	 bigger
criminals	become	kings;	smaller	criminals	suffer	in	the	jails,	bigger	ones	become
emperors.	 If	you	kill	one	person	you	will	be	a	murderer,	 if	you	kill	many	you
will	be	Alexander	the	Great.
That's	how	royal	families	are	born.
Nobody	is	noble	 just	by	being	born	in	a	noble	family.	One	is	noble	only	when
one	attains	to	spiritual	birth.	When	one	is	reborn	through	meditation,	when	one
goes	beyond	the	mind,	that	is	the	rebirth.	When	one	knows	absolutely	on	one's
own	that	"I	am	not	the	mind,	I	am	the	watcher,	the	one	who	observes	the	mind;	I
am	 pure	 observation,	 seeing,	 knowing,	 consciousness,"	 then	 a	 new	 life	 starts.
That	 life	has	grace,	 it	has	great	nobility.	 It	 is	 the	highest	kind	of	 life	on	earth.
Only	buddhas	live	it.
A	buddha	is	noble	not	because	he	is	the	son	of	a	king,	otherwise	Jesus	would	not
be	noble	because	he	is	just	the	son	of	a	poor	carpenter.	But	Jesus	is	as	noble	as
Buddha.	Nobility	has	to	be	earned	through	meditation.
Others	don't	live,	they	only	crawl	in	the	mud.	They	never	become	lotuses.	They
have	the	potential	but	they	never	actualize	it.
Sannyas	means	a	commitment	to	self-actualization.	It	means	a	decision	that	from
now	onwards	your	whole	energy	will	be	involved	in	growing	beyond	the	mind,
in	becoming	more	centered,	in	knowing	more	and	more	who	you	are.
The	day	that	you	know	who	you	are,	you	are	born	anew.	You	become	a	brahmin,
the	 one	 who	 knows	 God.	 You	 become	 noble.	 By	 knowing	 God	 one	 becomes
noble	 --	 not	 by	 riches,	 not	 by	 blood,	 not	 by	 heredity;	 those	 are	 all	 nonsense
things.
Character	 can	 have	 two	 dimensions.	 One	 is	 the	 superficial	 character	 that	 is
taught	 by	 the	 society,	 imposed	by	 the	 church.	 It	 has	 no	 roots	 in	 you,	 it	 is	 just
painted	 on	 from	 the	 outside.	 It	 is	 not	 growth.	 It	 is	 not	 an	 evolution	 of	 your
consciousness,	 it	 is	 implanted,	 imposed;	 hence	 deep	 down	 you	 are	 against	 it.
And	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
creates	the	split.	You	have	to	do	certain	things,	you	have	to	follow	certain	rules
because	 the	 society	 wants	 them	 to	 be	 followed	 and	 otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 in
trouble.	But	your	inner	being	resists	every	effort	to	reduce	you	to	a	slave.	So	the
split	is	created.	The	whole	of	humanity	is,	in	a	certain	sense,	schizophrenic.	The
credit	goes	to	the	priests	and	the	politicians.	They	have	divided	every	person.
Then	character	is	nothing	but	a	kind	of	decoration.	You	are	respected	for	it,	your
ego	is	fed	through	it.
You	can't	go	against	it	because	you	know	that	you	will	lose	your	respectability;
you	can't	go	against	 it,	because	you	don't	want	your	ego	to	suffer	any	damage.
Then	 the	 only	 possible	 way	 to	 create	 a	 certain	 temporary	 adjustment	 within
yourself	is	to	become	two	persons;	one	that	you	show	you	are	and	one	that	you
are.	 You	 are	 one	 from	 the	 front	 door	 and	 the	 other	 from	 the	 back	 door.	 That
creates	 hypocrisy,	 and	 hypocrisy	 cannot	 give	 you	 strength	 of	 character.	 It	 is
impotent,	it	weakens	you,	it	destroys	you.	It	is	suicidal.
The	 second	 dimension	 of	 character	 is	 totally	 different	 from	 the	 first.	 It	 is	 a
growth.	 It	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 your	 inner	 consciousness.	 It	 comes	 through
meditation.	Nobody	can	 teach	you	what	 to	do	and	what	not	 to	do.	Yes,	certain
hints	can	be	given	 to	you	about	how	 to	be	more	aware,	how	 to	be	more	clear,
how	to	be	less	confused,	how	to	see	into	things	through	and	through.
That's	what	meditation	 is:	 an	 insight	 into	 things,	 a	 penetrating	 insight,	 so	 that
you	can	find	on	your	own	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	And	when	you	find
on	your	own	it	is	a	joy	to	do	right,	it	is	a	bliss	to	do	right.	In	fact,	you	cannot	do
wrong.	It	is	impossible.	For	the	real	meditator	there	is	no	alternative,	no	choice.
The	moment	he	sees	how	things	are,	he	inevitably	acts	in	the	right	way.
Then	 there	 is	 character	 which	 has	 beauty.	 That	 character	 may	 not	 bring
respectability	 to	you.	You	may	even	be	punished	 for	 it,	 because	a	 real	man	of
character	never	goes	without	being	punished	by	the	society.
The	society	belongs	to	the	hypocrites,	the	society	belongs	to	the	schizophrenic.
They	 are	 the	 rulers,	 they	 are	 the	 people	 who	 are	 in	 power.	 They	 dominate
religion,	 they	dominate	politics,	 they	dominate	everything;	hence	a	 real	man	 is
bound	to	be	punished	by	them.	They	cannot	tolerate	him.
It	 is	 not	 an	 accident	 that	 Socrates	 was	 poisoned	 or	 Jesus	 was	 crucified,	 or
Mansoor	 was	 killed.	 It	 is	 absolutely	 logical;	 anything	 else	 would	 have	 been
illogical.	The	 society	 behaved	 in	 a	 logical	way.	These	 people	were	 bringing	 a
different	dimension	of	 character,	 and	 if	 that	became	 infectious,	 then	 the	whole
structure	 of	 the	 society	 and	 the	 investment	 in	 it	would	have	gone	 to	 the	dogs.
And	 the	 people	 who	 are	 in	 power	 would	 not	 like	 that.	 They	 never	 want	 any
change.	 The	 haves	 never	 want	 any	 change,	 the	 haves	 cannot	 go	 through	 any
revolution.	 They	 cannot	 help	 any	 revolution,	 outer	 or	 inner,	 because	 every
change	will	be	a	loss	for	them.
Remember	that	sannyas	is	not	a	kind	of	morality.	It	is	not	in	any	way	puritan.	It
does	 not	 expect	 you	 to	 follow	 certain	 commandments.	 Sannyas	 is	 a	 simple
phenomenon.	It	is	awareness,	it	is	a	meditativeness.	And	everything	else	comes
as	a	consequence,	as	a	by-product.
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	Man's	Nature
8	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002085
ShortTitle:	WITHME08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
purposes	only.]
My	work	 here	 is	 to	 make	 you	 aware	 of	 your	 great	 potential,	 of	 your	 infinite
possibility,	 of	 the	 heights	 that	 you	 can	 reach,	 of	 the	 depths	 that	 you	 can
penetrate.	 Your	 heights	 are	 higher	 than	 the	 Himalayas,	 and	 your	 depths	 are
deeper	than	the	Pacific.	God	has	given	you	so	much,	he	has	made	you	so	rich,	so
inexhaustibly	rich	--	and	we	are	living	like	beggars.
My	sannyas	means	a	declaration	that	you	are	no	more	a	beggar	but	an	emperor,
an	empress.
We	 are	 never	 born	 and	we	 never	 die.	Birth	 and	 death	 are	 both	 episodes	 in	 an
eternal	 life.	 Life	 does	 not	 begin	with	 birth	 and	 does	 not	 end	with	 death.	 It	 is
before	death,	it	is	after	death;	it	continues.	birth	and	death	are	ordinary	episodes,
incidents,	 nothing	 of	much	 importance.	Millions	 of	 times	 you	 have	 been	 born
and	millions	of	times	you	have	died,	and	still	you	are,	nothing	has	happened	to
you.	No	birth,	no	death	has	left	even	a	trace	upon	your	being.	It	is	as	clean,	as
pure	as	ever,	unpolluted,	fresh,	young,	but	we	don't	know	how	to	find	it,	where
to	find	it.
We	are	so	identified	with	the	body	and	the	mind	--	that's	the	only	problem.	That
has	to	be	resolved.	If	you	think	you	are	the	body-mind,	then	you	will	never	find
your	immortality.	This	is	a	fallacy	which	has	to	be	dropped.	You	are	a	witness.
You	can	see	your	body,	you	can	see	your	mind,	so	you	are	the	seer	not	the	seen,
you	 are	 the	 observer	 not	 the	 object	 of	 observation.	 Because	 mind	 can	 be
observed	 it	 is	an	object;	 the	body	can	be	observed,	 it	 is	an	object.	You	are	 the
observer,	always	the	observer	and	never	anything	else.
Become	more	and	more	centred	in	your	observation,	in	your	witnessing,	in	your
awareness.	 And	 that	 will	 give	 you	 the	 key,	 that	 will	 unlock	 the	 door	 of
immortality	 in	 you.	 Unless	 one	 knows	 that	 one	 is	 immortal,	 fear	 never
disappears.	And	it	is	fear	that	destroys	all	your	energies.	It	is	fear	that	does	not
allow	us	 to	 love.	How	can	you	 love	when	you	 are	 afraid.	 It	 is	 fear	 that	 never
allows	 us	 to	 live	 totally,	whole-heartedly.	 If	 you	 are	 afraid,	 how	 can	 you	 live
totally	and	whole-heartedly?	--	you	are	always	holding	back.	You	go	only	so	far
and	then	you	stop.
When	fear	disappears	 life	becomes	 love,	when	fear	 is	no	more,	 life	becomes	a
beautiful	adventure.	Then	it	is	from	one	peak	to	another	peak,	a	constant	rising
upwards	--	and	there	is	no	end	to	that	eternal	journey.
Mind	is	man.	When	you	go	beyond	mind	you	go	beyond	humanity.	The	animal
is	below	mind,	the	Buddhas	are	beyond	mind,	and	between	the	animals	and	the
Buddhas	are	all	human	beings.	Human	beings	are	in	a	kind	of	limbo-half	animal,
half	god.	 the	past	 is	 animal,	 and	 the	 future	 and	 the	potential	 are	divine;	hence
man	is	in	more	anguish	than	any	animal	on	the	earth.	All	animals	are	at	ease,	at
peace	with	themselves.	They	are	in	a	way	complete,	nothing	is	missing.	A	dog	is
a	dog	and	a	cat	is	a	cat.
Man	is	not	complete,	he	is	incomplete.	Something	is	missing.	He	is	on	the	way.
He	has	left	the	past	and	he	has	not	reached	the	goal	yet.	He	is	on	the	way,	he	is	a
traveller.	That	 creates	 anxiety	 as	 to	whether	 or	 not	 he	will	 be	 able	 to	make	 it.
And	 that	creates	many	problems,	many	 times.	One	problem	is	 the	desire	 to	go
back,	 to	 be	 an	 animal	 again.	 So	 in	many	moments	 you	 become	 animal	 again.
When	you	are	angry,	when	you	become	sexual,	when	you	are	full	of	lust,	when
you	 are	 greedy,	 when	 you	 lose	 all	 awareness	 and	 you	 start	 functioning
mechanically	you	fall	below	humanity.
It	 is	because	of	 this	 that	drugs	have	 so	much	appeal:	drugs	help	people	 to	 fall
below	the	mind.	You	forget	all	the	problems	and	all	the	anxieties	when	you	are
under	 the	 impact	 of	 a	 drug,	 alcohol	 or	 anything	 else.	 But	 sooner	 or	 later	 you
have	to	come	back	to	your	senses	and	all	your	problems	are	there.	In	fact	 they
have	grown	meanwhile.	Nothing	is	gained,	you	have	simply	wasted	time.
But	the	desire	to	go	back	arises	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	future	seems	to	be
unknown,	uncertain;	the	past	seems	to	be	certain,	you	have	known	it,	your	body
knows	it,	you	every	cell	is	created	by	the	past,	you	mind	is	created	by	the	past.
So	the	past	has	a	great	pull	over	you,	but	nobody	can	go	to	the	past	again	--	that
is	 a	 problem.	Once	 the	 child	 is	 born	 he	 cannot	 go	 back	 into	 the	womb	 again.
Once	you	have	become	a	young	person,	howsoever	beautiful	the	childhood	was
you	cannot	be	a	child	again,	there	is	no	going	back.
One	 can	 enjoy	 the	 idea	 of	 going	 back,	 one	 can	 imagine	 also	 that	 one	 is	 back
again,	but	there	is	no	possible	way	of	going	back.	You	cannot	move	backwards
in	time,	time	has	no	reverse	gear	in	it.	You	have	to	go	ahead,	either	dancingly	or
reluctantly	--	 that	 is	up	to	you.	If	you	go	dancingly	you	go	joyously.	If	you	go
reluctantly	you	go	in	misery,	in	suffering.
Man	has	to	go	beyond	himself,	man	has	to	surpass	himself,	only	then	does	man
become	 complete.	 That	 is	 a	 paradox.	 Only	 by	 going	 beyond	 himself	 does	 he
becomes	complete,	entire.	Then	he	again	knows	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
beauty	of	being.	The	becoming	is	over,	the	travelling	is	finished,	one	has	arrived.
That's	the	state	of	a	buddha,	the	enlightened	person.
Go	beyond	mind	so	 that	you	can	go	beyond	humanity,	so	 that	you	can	surpass
humanity.	That	 is	 the	greatest	challenge,	and	only	 the	greatest	can	accept	 it.	 In
the	acceptance	of	the	challenge	something	great	is	born	in	you.
Sannyas	is	a	challenge,	the	challenge	of	surpassing	yourself.
Mind	 is	 never	 silent.	 It	 is	 constantly	 chattering.	 It	 is	 constantly	 crowded	with
many	thoughts,	desires.	It	goes	on	dreaming	and	dreaming.	It	is	never	still	even
for	a	 single	moment.	And	we	have	become	 identified	with	 the	mind,	we	 think
that	we	are	our	mind.	That	is	creating	the	whole	misery.
Get	out	of	the	mind	and	you	will	come	back	to	your	senses.	Get	out	of	the	mind
because	the	mind	is	a	kind	of	madness.	But	one	can	get	out	of	the	mind	in	two
ways.	One	is	falling	below	it	--	then	you	will	have	to	be	put	in	a	mental	asylum.
The	other	is	going	beyond	it	--	then	you	become	a	Buddha	or	a	Jesus.	So	please
choose	this	way,	the	second.
There	is	a	fear	of	going	out	of	the	mind.	The	fear	is	because	mad	people	are	also
out	of	 the	mind.	But	 they	have	 fallen	below,	and	one	has	 to	 rise	above.	When
you	rise	above	the	mind	great	silence	descends.
You	 see	 the	 mind	 deep	 down	 in	 the	 valley	 chattering	 still,	 but	 the	 distance
becomes	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 every	 day	 and	 one	 day	 you	 cannot	 hear	 all	 that
chattering	at	all.	That	day	one	becomes	enlightened.
Mind	lives	either	in	the	past	or	in	the	future.	If	you	are	young	then	the	mind	lives
in	 the	 past.	 The	 old	man	 has	 no	 future.	He	 knows	 that	 there	 is	 death	 so	 he	 is
afraid	 to	 look	at	 the	future.	He	goes	on	reminiscing	about	 the	past,	all	 that	has
been	 and	 is	 no	 more.	 He	 enjoys	 those	 golden	 days.	 Much	 of	 it	 is	 just
imagination,	 it	 has	 never	 been	 there;	 much	 of	 it	 is	 just	 invention	 to	 remain
occupied.
The	 moment	 a	 person	 starts	 living	 in	 the	 past	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 he	 starts
becoming	old.
Psychologically,	that	is	the	point	from	where	one	becomes	old.	Physiologically,
it	 may	 not	 coincide,	 that	 that	 is	 the	 psychological	 old	 age,	 when	 you	 start
thinking	about	the	past	and	the	beauties	of	the	past	and	those	golden	experiences
and	 those	nice	days,	 and	how	everything	was	 just	 great.	The	 future	 is	 so	dark
that	you	are	afraid	to	look	at	it	and	you	want	to	remain	occupied	with	the	past.
But	that	is	not	so	with	the	young	person.	The	young	person	looks	at	the	future.
Death	 is	 far	 away,	 in	 fact	 the	 young	 person	 never	 thinks	 of	 death.	 It	 is	 so	 far
away,	it	is	beyond	his	scope	to	think	about	it;	he	does	not	have	that	much	insight.
So	he	lives	in	the	future,	he	makes	castles	in	the	air:"I	will	do	this	and	I	will	get
that	and	I	will	be	this	and	tomorrow	it	is	going	to	happen;	if	not	tomorrow	then
the	day	after	tomorrow."
The	old	man	wastes	his	 present	 in	 the	past,	 the	young	man	wastes	his	 present
engaged	in	the	future.
Both	 exercises	 are	 absolutely	 futile.	Not	 only	 futile	 but	 very	 harmful,	 because
the	present	which	is,	is	being	wasted	for	that	which	is	not.
Don't	 think	of	 the	future.	Live	in	the	present.	That's	my	message	to	you.	Be	in
the	present	moment.	And	if	you	can	be	present	to	the	moment	you	escape	from
all	 kinds	 of	 stupidities	 of	 the	 old	 people.	 If	 you	 can	 be	 in	 the	 present	 you
transcend	 time.	 Time	 consists	 of	 past	 and	 future,	 eternity	 consists	 only	 of	 the
present.
Eternity	is	now,	always	now	and	never	then,	always	here	and	never	there.	And	to
enter	into	the	now	and	the	here	is	to	enter	into	God.
This	has	to	become	your	meditation,	to	come	more	and	more	close	to	the	present
moment.	 I	 am	 not	 saying	 not	 tp	 prepare	 for	 a	 journey.	 If	 you	 are	 going
somewhere	you	will	have	to	purchase	the	ticket	ahead	of	time,	you	will	have	to
plan	 it.	 I'm	 not	 saying	 not	 to	 do	 that.	 That	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 the	 future.
What	 I	mean	 is	 a	 psychological	 hope,	 desire,	 because	 the	 present	 seems	 to	 be
unfulfilling	 you	 escape	 into	 the	 future	 and	 you	 start	 hoping	 that	 there	will	 be
fulfilment.
Stop	going	 into	 the	psychological	 future.	The	 factual	 future	 is	okay,	 it	 is	not	a
disturbance	at	all.	The	factual	past	is	also	okay,	it	is	not	a	disturbance	at	all.	You
have	to	remember	your	name	and	your	address	and	when	you	meet	your	father
you	have	to	recognise	him.	You	can't	say	to	him	"The	past	is	the	past	and	I	don't
know	who	your	are!"(laughter)	These	are	factual	things,	they	are	perfectly	okay.
But	 deep	 inside,	 the	 past	 should	 not	 possess	 you	 and	 the	 future	 should	 not	 be
your	occupation.	Relax	into	the	moment.	And	then	one	is	entitled	to	all	kinds	of
miracles.
Man	 can	 live	 his	 life	 in	 two	 ways.	 One	 is	 out	 of	 the	 past;	 then	 life	 is	 not	 a
response	 but	 a	 reaction.	 You	 live	 through	 ready-made	 conclusions,	 you	 don't
respond	 to	 the	moment.	 To	 the	 situation	 that	 is	 confronting	 you.	 You	 already
have	an	answer,	even	before	the	question	is	raised.	Your	answer	will	never	fit	the
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
question,	 because	 life	 goes	 on	 changing.	 Every	 moment	 it	 is	 different,	 every
moment	it	 is	new.	It	 is	always	novel,	 it	 is	always	a	surprise.	It	never	loses	that
quality	of	surprise.	but	if	you	are	carrying	too	many	ready-made	answers	in	your
mind	you	will	miss	the	newness	of	life.
The	 other	 way	 to	 live	 is	 not	 to	 live	 through	 the	 past	 but	 to	 live	 directly,
immediately,	 to	 live	without	 the	mind,	 to	 respond	 like	 a	mirror,	 to	 reflect	 that
which	 is.	 and	 the	 life	 of	 response	 has	 tremendous	 beauty,	 grace,	 truth	 and
sincerity,	 because	 whatsoever	 you	 do	 is	 adequate.	 You	 never	 repent	 for	 it.	 It
always	 fits	 the	situation.	 It	 comes	out	of	your	consciousness,	 it	does	not	come
out	of	the	cultivated	character.
Let	it	be	a	key	for	you.	Live	naturally,	spontaneously,	responsively,	meditatively,
in	 the	present,	here	and	now,	and	 then	you	will	know	 the	 significance	of	your
life.	Millions	of	mysteries	will	open	their	doors	for	you.
The	whole	 of	 humanity	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 two	 categories:	 the	 fools	 and	 the
wise.	 The	 fools	 are	 those	 who	 live	 in	 a	 false	 world,	 a	 world	 of	 their	 own
imagination.	They	 live	 in	 dreams,	 they	 believe	 in	 their	 dreams,	 and	 obviously
they	are	doomed	because	dreams	are	dreams	and	they	can	never	become	real.
The	 wise	 ones	 are	 those	 who	 have	 dropped	 all	 dreams,	 all	 sleep,	 who	 have
become	aware,	who	don't	project	anything	onto	existence,	who	are	just	mirrors
that	don't	project	anything;	they	simply	reflect.	And	when	one	becomes	a	mirror
life	 is	a	 sheer	 joy.	Each	moment	 is	 so	precious,	 so	ecstatic,	 that	one	could	not
have	 imagined	 it.	 Each	 people	 on	 the	 seashore	 suddenly	 turns	 into	 a	 diamond
and	 each	 flower	 has	 the	 face	 of	God.	 The	whole	 existence	 starts	 overflowing
with	godliness.	One	is	born	anew.
Everybody	 is	 born	 as	 a	 fool	 because	 everybody	 is	 born	 asleep,	 dreaming.
Everybody	has	the	capacity	to	wake	up	but	very	few	people	use	their	capacity	to
wake	up.	By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	taking	a	vow	to	wake	up.	That's	what
sannyas	 is	 all	 about:	 a	 decision	 to	wake	 up.	And	 if	 you	 are	 really	 intent,	 it	 is
bound	to	happen.	It	is	inevitable.
Man	 is	 a	 seed	 of	 divine	 glory,	 but	 only	 a	 seed	 --	 remember	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 yet	 a
flower,	it	has	not	even	started	growing.	It	is	a	potentiality.
At	 birth	 we	 are	 only	 potential	 beings.	 Life	 is	 an	 opportunity	 to	 actualise	 the
potential.	But	very	few	people	work	upon	themselves.	They	pay	much	attention
to	money,	power,	prestige,	and	they	don't	pay	any	attention	to	their	own	growth,
which	is	the	most	essential	thing	because	everything	else	will	be	taken	away.
Death	 will	 destroy	 all	 your	 sandcastles,	 but	 it	 cannot	 destroy	 your	 growth,	 it
cannot	 destroy	whatsoever	 you	 have	made	 actual	 in	 your	 inner	 being.	 That	 is
beyond	 the	grasp	of	death.	And	 that	which	 is	beyond	 the	grasp	of	death	 is	 the
real	treasure.
In	the	world	people	 think	that	 they	are	gaining,	earning,	being	successful;	 they
are	simply	living	in	illusion.	The	only	people	who	are	gaining	something	are	the
people	who	are	moving	inwards,	who	are	becoming	more	and	more	alert	to	their
immense	potential,	who	are	trying	to	transform	it	into	a	reality.
When	one	 realises	one's	potential	 in	 its	 totality	one	 is	 a	god.	God	 is	not	 some
person	 somewhere,	 it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 state	 of	 consciousness.	 Everybody	 is
capable	 of	 becoming	 a	 god	 --	 and	 if	 we	 miss	 we	 miss	 because	 of	 ourselves,
nobody	else	can	be	held	responsible.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	taking	the	whole	responsibility	upon	yourself.
It	 is	a	commitment	 to	growth,	a	commitment	 towards	self-actualisation,	with	a
deep	 understanding	 that	 this	 is	 our	 responsibility	 towards	 ourselves,	 all	 other
responsibilities	are	secondary.
And	 if	 the	primary	 is	 not	 fulfilled	you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 fulfil	 the	 secondary
responsibilities.	 If	 the	 primary	 is	 fulfilled	 the	 secondary	 responsibilities	 are
easily	fulfilled.
Become	what	you	can	become.
Man	is	a	seed.	If	you	cut	the	seed	there	is	no	fragrance,	but	if	you	sow	the	seed,
if	you	give	 it	 the	right	soil,	 the	right	climate,	 the	right	amount	of	 fertiliser	and
water	 and	 sun	 and	 air,	 the	 seed	 disappears	 and	 a	 sprout	 arises.	 Soon	 there	 are
many	 many	 leaves	 and	 great	 foliage,	 and	 then	 flowers	 appear.	 And	 then	 the
miracle	 --	 the	miracle	 of	 fragrance.	 It	was	 hidden	 in	 the	 seed	 but	 it	 needed	 a
certain	process	to	become	manifest.
God	 is	 hidden	 in	 us	 like	 fragrance	 in	 a	 seed.	 It	 needs	 a	 certain	 progress	 to
become	manifest.	Right	now	it	is	hidden	but	it	can	become	manifest.
Sannyas	means	initiation	into	a	certain	mystery,	 in	a	certain	mystic	path	which
can	help	you	go	through	the	great	transformation	from	the	seed	to	the	fragrance.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
We	are	seeds	but	 it	would	be	unfortunate	 to	die	as	a	seed.	We	have	to	become
flowers	and	we	have	to	release	our	fragrance,	only	then	is	there	contentment.	A
tree	is	fulfilled	when	it	blooms,	when	the	spring	comes	and	the	tree	has	released,
poured	its	heart	into	colours,	into	fragrance,	into	joy.	When	the	tree	is	dancing	in
the	wind,	in	the	sun,	it	is	fulfilled.
Exactly	is	the	case	with	man	too.	A	Buddha	is	a	tree	which	has	bloomed,	a	Jesus
is	a	 tree	which	has	come	 to	 release	 its	 fragrance.	We	are	all	carrying	 the	same
kind	of	seeds	in	us.	Everyone	is	a	Buddha	unmanifest,	a	Christ	ready	to	be	born
at	any	moment.
My	work	 here	 is	 to	 make	 you	 aware	 of	 your	 great	 potential,	 of	 your	 infinite
possibility,	of	the	heights	that	you	can	reach,	of	the	depth	that	you	can	penetrate.
Your	heights	are	higher	than	the	Himalayas,	and	your	depths	are	deeper	than	the
Pacific.	And	once	you	know	your	heights	and	your	depths,	life	becomes	nothing
but	gratitude.	God	has	given	you	so	much.	He	has	poured	all	his	creativity	into
your	being,	he	has	made	you	so	rich,	so	inexhaustibly	rich	--	and	we	are	living
like	beggars.
My	sannyas	means	a	declaration	that	you	are	no	more	a	beggar,	but	an	emperor,
an	empress.
One	 can	 exist	 in	 two	 ways:	 either	 by	 fighting	 on	 the	 outside	 for	 money,	 for
power,	for	prestige...	To	conquer	the	world	--	that	is	one	way	of	life.	It	is	a	futile
way.	It	is	for	the	stupid	and	the	mediocre,	but	it	is	very	attractive,	for	the	simple
reason	 that	 everybody	 is	 running	 for	 it.	 And	 man	 is	 a	 great	 imitator:	 seeing
everybody	rushing	 for	something	he	also	starts	 rushing.	He	starts	 thinking	 that
there	must	be	something	there,	otherwise	why	are	so	many	people	going?	And
there	 is	 every	 possibility	 that	 others	 are	 going	 for	 the	 same	 reason	 --	 because
others	are	going.	Everybody	may	be	going	for	the	same	reason.
Nobody	knows	why	people	are	running	towards	money,	power	and	prestige,	but
they	are	 running.	 It	 is	a	kind	of	madness,	but	 it	gives	something,	 it	 feeds	your
ego.
The	 fight	 is	 futile,	 the	 ego	 is	 false	 and	 when	 you	 die	 you	 have	 to	 leave
everything	 that	 you	 have	 conquered.	 That's	 why	 everybody	 dies	 crying	 and
weeping,	 in	 deep	pain	 and	 suffering.	The	pain	 and	 suffering	 is	 not	 because	 of
death,	remember.	The	pain	is	basically	that	"I	lived	my	life	in	a	futile	way;	the
time	is	gone	and	I	am	finished	and	my	hands	are	empty."	That	is	the	pain	not	the
pain	of	death.
Death	 is	 not	 painful,	 death	 is	 very	 soothing,	 like	 deep	 sleep.	 The	 pain	 is	 that
"The	whole	of	life	has	passed	and	I	was	just	making	castles	in	the	air	and	I	am
going	empty-handed.	I	came	empty-handed	and	I	am	going	empty-handed.	My
whole	life	has	been	a	sheer	wastage."
But	 there	 is	 another	 way	 to	 live	 too.	 One	 can	 be	 an	 inner	 warrior.	 One	 can
conquer	 one's	 unconsciousness,	 one	 can	 conquer	 one's	 greed,	 anger,	 sexuality.
One	can	transform	all	these	energies	into	something	tremendously	beautiful.	and
when	one	has	known	the	secret	of	transforming	one's	inner	being,	there	is	great
joy.	Every	fibre	of	your	being	dances	with	joy	because	now	you	know	that	death
cannot	take	anything	away	from	you.	Now	you	know	that	you	have	attained	the
real	treasure.
So	be	a	warrior	in	the	second	sense.	The	real	fight	is	in,	not	there	on	the	outside,
and	 the	 real	 fight	 is	 not	 with	 others.	 The	 real	 fight	 is	 with	 your	 own
unconsciousness,	with	your	own	unawareness.
Our	desires	are	dreams,	all	our	thoughts	are	dreams.	And	we	go	on	continuously
living	in	dreams	because	we	are	asleep.	Dreams	can	exist	only	if	we	are	asleep,
and	dreams	disappear	the	moment	we	awake.
Going	beyond	dreams	means	awaking.
It	 is	 time!	 Enough	 you	 have	 sleep...	 for	 many	 many	 lives.	 Don't	 miss	 this
opportunity	 to	wake	 up	 because	 rare	 is	 the	 opportunity,	 and	 to	miss	 it	 is	 very
easy.	So	put	your	whole	energy	into	waking	up.
In	the	beginning	it	seems	almost	impossible	--	how	to	do	it?	But	if	one	goes	on
trying...	In	sleep	one	tosses	and	turns	but	if	one	goes	on	tossing	and	turning,	it	is
bound	 to	 disrupt	 the	 sleep.	 And	 just	 a	 moment's	 glimpse	 of	 being	 awake	 is
enough	to	trigger	a	new	process	in	your	being.	Then	more	and	more	moments	of
awakening	happen.	And	the	day	that	one	becomes	fully	awakened,	twenty-four
hours	a	day,	even	while	one	is	asleep	one	remains	alert,	aware,	when	the	body
sleeps	but	the	soul	never	sleeps,	when	one	is	capable	of	being	awake	twenty-four
hours	a	day	even	when	the	body	is	resting	--	then	one	should	feel	contented.	One
has	arrived.	Before	that,	make	every	possible	effort	that	you	can.	Don't	leave	any
stone	unturned.
We	live	 in	desire.	Desire	means	discontentment.	Desire	means	 that	whatsoever
is,	 is	not	 right,	not	 enough,	more	 is	needed.	And	desire	 is	never	 fulfilled.	 It	 is
unfulfillable	by	its	very	nature.
You	can	have	as	much	as	you	desire,	but	the	moment	you	have	it	desire	goes	on
jumping	ahead	of	you,	it	starts	asking	for	more.	Its	greed	knows	no	limits,	it	is
unlimited	greed.	It	is	like	the	horizon:	it	looks	so	close	--	you	can	reach	it	within
an	hour	if	you	run.	But	you	cannot	reach	it,	you	can	never	reach	it.	The	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
distance	between	you	and	the	horizon	will	remain	the	same,	constantly	the	same,
because	 there	 is	no	horizon;	 it	 is	an	 illusion.	The	earth	 is	not	meeting	with	 the
sky	anywhere,	it	only	appears	to	be.
So	is	the	case	with	desire.	It	only	appears	that	if	I	could	reach	to	that	point,	if	I
could	 attain	 to	 this	 or	 that,	 there	 would	 be	 contentment.	 I	 would	 be	 happy,	 I
would	be	fulfilled.	But	it	never	happens.
One	has	to	understand	desiring	and	its	futility.	In	that	very	understanding	desire
disappears	and	one	is	left	at	home	in	deep	peace.	When	there	is	no	desire,	there
is	no	disturbance.	Desire	is	the	only	disturbance.
When	 all	 desires	 have	 gone	 there	 is	 tremendous	 silence	 inside.	 In	 that	 silence
you	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 God,	 and	 that	 is	 fulfilling.	 That	 fulfils
because	 it	 brings	 joy,	 infinite	 joy.	 It	 fulfils	 because	 it	 brings	 something	 of	 the
beyond,	something	which	cannot	be	 taken	away	from	you,	something	which	 is
inexhaustible,	something	deathless.	It	opens	the	doors	of	the	kingdom	of	God.	It
is	your	kingdom,	because	you	are	not	separate	from	God	and	God	is	not	separate
from	you.
So	your	work	has	to	be	to	understand	desiring;	and	in	that	very	understanding	it
drops.	You	are	not	to	renounce	it,	you	are	not	to	repress	it,	because	if	you	repress
it,	it	will	come	up	again,	if	you	renounce	it,	it	will	follow	you.	It	is	only	through
deep	understanding	that	it	disappears.
Man	 lives	 in	 bondage,	 and	 the	 bondage	 is	 not	 imposed	 by	 others,	 it	 is	 self-
created.	 It	 is	 created	 because	 we	 are	 afraid	 of	 the	 insecure.	 In	 the	 name	 of
security	 we	 create	 a	 bondage	 around	 ourselves.	 Yes,	 it	 gives	 a	 feeling	 of
cosiness,	warmth,	safety,	but	it	is	all	false	because	sooner	or	later	death	will	take
it	all	away.
Because	 of	 this	we	 never	 explore,	 we	 never	 go	 beyond	 the	 boundaries	 of	 the
familiar.	 The	 familiar	 is	 very	 small	 and	 we	 go	 on	 moving	 in	 the	 familiar,	 in
circles.	Our	life	knows	no	growth,	because	growth	can	only	happen	if	we	move
not	in	circles	but	in	a	line.	If	we	are	linear	then	there	is	growth.	If	we	go	around
in	circles	we	go	on	repeating	the	same	thing	again	and	again.
Freedom	is	possible	because	we	have	made	our	own	prison.	We	can	get	out	of	it
any	moment	that	we	decide	to.	It	 is	only	a	question	of	decision,	of	courage,	of
guts.
Freedom	 is	 the	 ultimate	 value	 in	 life.	 Nothing	 is	 more	 important	 than	 that,
because	 out	 of	 it	 comes	 everything	 else	 that	 is	 valuable.	 Love	 arises	 as	 a
fragrance,	joy	arises,	meaning	arises;	for	the	first	time	life	becomes	significant,
tremendously	 significant.	 And	 one	 is	 constantly	 moving	 beyond	 the	 known,
going	into	the	unknown.	Life	becomes	a	thrill,	an	adventure.	But	we	have	made
life	just	a	dragging	affair.	It	seems	safe,	it	appears	secure,	but	there	is	no	security,
no	safety	anywhere.	They	are	impossible.
Life	 in	 its	 intrinsicalness	 is	 insecure.	 Only	 death	 is	 secure.	 You	 cannot	 take
anything	away	from	a	dead	man	--	or	can	you?	even	death	cannot	do	any	harm	to
him,	he	is	already	dead.	In	his	grave	he	is	so	absolutely	secure.
Because	we	are	so	obsessed	with	security	we	have	made	our	houses	our	graves.
We	don't	live	in	them,	we	only	die	in	them	slowly	slowly;	it	is	a	gradual	kind	of
suicide.
Sannyas	means	freedom,	freedom	from	all	self-created	securities,	safeties.	In	the
beginning	one	feels	afraid,	scared,	that	is	natural,	but	once	you	become	attuned
to	the	insecure	and	you	know	the	joy	of	insecurity	then	you	never	look	back	to
those	old	toys	that	you	used	to	think	were	keeping	you	life	secure.
And	 they	 were	 not	 securities,	 they	 were	 simply	 prisons,	 chains	 around	 your
being.
One	 need	 not	 be	 a	Hindu,	Christian,	Mohammedan,	Catholic	 or	 communist	 --
these	are	all	self-created	prisons.	One	need	not	live	in	an	ideology.	One	should
be	 free	 from	all	 ideologies,	 all	dogmas,	creeds,	 scriptures.	Only	 then	 is	 life	an
exploration,	because	when	you	don't	have	any	conclusion	you	can	explore.
We	are	brought	up	in	such	a	way	that	we	are	reduced	to	slaves.	And	the	slavery
is	so	subtle	that	very	rarely	do	we	become	aware	of	it.	We	go	on	living	life	as	a
slave	thinking	that	this	is	all	that	there	is	to	live.
This	is	not	all,	this	is	nothing.	This	is	not	even	the	beginning.
Life	begins	only	when	you	become	free	from	all	kinds	of	bondages:	the	bondage
of	 nation,	 the	 bondage	 of	 race,	 the	 bondage	 of	 church	 --	 ideological,	 social,
political,	religious.	When	you	become	free	from	all	these	imprisonments,	when
you	simply	drop	all	that	you	have	been	told	is	important,	when	you	simply	drop
all	that	you	have	been	told	to	believe	in;	when	you	neither	believe	nor	disbelieve
a	great	freedom	arises	in	your	being.	That	freedom	is	sannyas;	and	that	freedom
then	takes	you	higher	and	higher	towards	the	ultimate.
Only	a	free	person	can	know	what	truth	is,	and	only	a	free	person	can	know	what
god	is,	what	love	is.
Freedom	is	very	essential	because	it	is	the	foundation	of	all	that	is	beautiful	and
great.
Light	 is	 the	 stuff	 that	 existence	 is	 made	 of.	Mystics	 have	 been	 saying	 so	 for
centuries,	now	physicists	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
also	agree	with	it	in	their	own	way.	It	is	the	only	point	on	which	mystics	and	the
physicists	agree,	that	existence	is	made	of	light.	Mystics	have	come	to	it	through
the	experience	of	their	own	being.	The	deeper	you	go,	the	lighter	it	becomes.
In	the	beginning,	when	you	start	entering	into	yourself,	it	is	very	dark,	very	very
dark,	unimaginably	dark.	You	cannot	believe	that	darkness	can	be	so	thick	and
so	dense.	that's	why	many	people	escape	immediately.	It	is	frightening,	it	looks
like	 death.	 But	 if	 you	 persist,	 and	 great	 perseverance	 is	 needed,	 if	 you	 go	 on
digging	deeper	and	deeper,	the	darkness	becomes	less	and	less	dark,	a	little	light
starts	arising.	At	the	innermost	core	of	your	being	there	is	nothing	but	light.
Now	 start	 moving	 inwards,	 and	 don't	 be	 afraid	 of	 the	 darkness	 that	 you	 will
encounter,	which	is	bound	to	be	encountered.	When	you	encounter	darkness	it	is
a	good	sign,	you	are	moving	in.	and	if	darkness	is	encountered	than	light	is	not
far	away.	When	the	night	is	very	dark,	the	dawn	is	very	close.
We	 are	 born	 of	 light,	 we	 are	 part	 of	 infinite	 light,	 and	 one	 day	 we	 have	 to
disappear	 into	 that	 infinity	 again.	We	are	 just	 rays	 of	 a	 faraway	 sun.	We	have
forgotten	our	home,	we	have	forgotten	our	source.
To	be	a	sannyasin	means	that	now	you	are	getting	ready	to	remember	it.	Sannyas
is	a	gesture	that	"I	am	available	to	be	reminded	of	my	home,	of	my	real	home,	of
my	real	source."
We	are	rays	of	light.	We	are	not	gross,	nothing	is	gross.	Because	existence	is	a
manifestation	of	god,	everything	is	very	subtle.	Even	matter	is	not	material,	even
matter	is	just	pure	light,	condensed	light.
Everything	is	a	different	manifestation	of	light,	a	tremendously	mysterious	wave
in	the	ocean	of	light.
To	see	it,	to	feel	it,	to	recognize	it,	is	meditation.	Watch	inside,	watch	outside.	In
the	beginning	it	 is	difficult	 to	see	walls	as	pure	light,	but	even	physicists	agree
that	 they	are	pure	light,	nothing	but	electrons,	condensed	electricity.	And	walls
are	 not	 static,	 rocks	 are	 not	 static;	 electrons	 are	 continuously	 in	 a	 tremendous
dance.	The	whole	existence	is	a	dance.
When	you	start	seeing	it	all	around	you	it	is	a	transformed	world.	And	the	day
you	see	it	inside	too,	the	division	between	the	inside	and	the	outside	disappears,
then	it	is	all	one,	it	is	the	same	phenomenon.	One	loses	one's	ego,	one	loses	one's
identity	as	a	separate	being.	One	becomes	part	of	 the	whole.	And	to	be	part	of
the	whole	is	to	be	holy.	That	is	true	holiness.
Those	 phony	holy	 people	 you	meet	 in	 the	 churches,	 in	 the	mosque	 and	 in	 the
temples	are	not	holy	at	all.
They	 have	 no	 idea	 of	 the	whole.	 They	 are	 very	 egoistic.	Of	 course	 they	 have
very	 pious	 egos,	 holier-than-thou,	 but	 a	 pious	 ego	 is	 the	 most	 egoistic
phenomenon	in	the	world.	It	is	the	most	poisonous,	because	it	is	so	subtle.
Enlightenment	is	a	forgotten	language,	it	has	to	be	remembered.	Sannyas	is	just
the	beginning	of	turning	in,	looking	in.
Following	Christ	does	not	mean	following	Jesus.	When	Jesus	disappears	Christ
is	 born	 in	 him.	When	 Gautam	 Siddhartha	 disappears	 Buddha	 is	 born	 in	 him.
They	are	totally	different	phenomena,	but	people	have	got	them	mixed-up.	They
think	 that	 to	 follow	 Christ	 means	 to	 follow	 Jesus.	 Nobody	 can	 follow	 Jesus
because	nobody	can	be	like	Jesus;	God	never	creates	the	same	person	again.	But
Christ	can	be	followed	because	Christ	is	a	state	of	consciousness.	It	has	nothing
to	do	with	the	person,	Jesus.	He	is	one	of	the	Christs,	that	is	true,	but	there	have
been	many	other	Christs	and	there	will	be	many	more.
Anyone	who	attains	to	the	ultimate	flowering	is	a	Christ.	To	be	enlightened	is	to
be	a	Christ.	To	know	who	you	are	is	to	be	a	Christ.	But	Christianity	has	taken	a
very	wrong	route.	It	became	too	focussed	on	Jesus,	the	person,	they	completely
forgot	 about	 the	 flowering,	 the	 fragrance	 which	 really	 makes	 him	 valuable.
Without	that	fragrance	he	is	nobody,	just	an	ordinary	carpenter.
Christhood	means	 that	meditation	has	 come	 to	 its	 peak.	One	has	gone	beyond
misery,	beyond	ego,	beyond	mind,	beyond	time.	One	has	become	one	with	 the
whole.
Blissfully	 follow	 the	 subtle	 path	 of	 being	 a	Christ.	Never	 be	 a	Christian,	 be	 a
Christ.	When	one	can	be	a	Christ	why	settle	for	being	a	Christian?	When	one	can
be	 a	Buddha	why	 be	 a	Buddhist?	 That's	my	 basic	message	 here,	 that	 you	 are
carrying	within	you	the	ultimate.	There	is	no	need	to	settle	for	less	than	that.
[....	page	missing?	241/190]
...	 that	 the	 person	 cannot	 even	 see	 that	 it	 is	 there.	 and	 it	works	 from	 the	 back
door,	 it	 is	 never	 there	 in	 front	 of	 you.	 It	works	 from	 the	 depth	 of	 your	 being.
Your	saints,	your	mahatmas,	are	nothing	but	egos	painted	in	a	religious	way.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
But	the	real	sage	is	one	who	is	no	more.	He	has	drowned	himself	in	the	totality,
he	has	merged	with	the	source.	That	source	is	light	and	that	source	is	God.
We	 are	 made	 of	 light;	 hence	 when	 you	 enter	 into	 deep	 meditation	 you	 start
feeling	more	and	more	light	inside.	When	you	reach	to	the	very	central	core	all	is
light,	pure	 light.	That	experience	 is	called	enlightenment	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	you	become	light	again.
Each	being	is	born	enlightened.	Each	being	is	born	a	Buddha,	a	Christ.	These	are
not	 states	 which	 have	 to	 be	 achieved,	 these	 are	 states	 which	 have	 to	 be	 only
recognised,	which	we	only	have	to	discover	within	our	own	being.	One	has	not
to	 go	 anywhere,	 one	 has	 not	 to	 do	 anything.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 process	 of	 becoming,
enlightenment	is	a	state	of	being.
Becoming	 means	 desire.	 Becoming	 means	 that	 it	 will	 happen	 in	 the	 future.
Becoming	means	that	you	will	have	to	strive	for	it.	You	may	succeed,	you	may
not	 succeed.	Who	knows?	Becoming	means	 that	you	will	 remain	 tense	until	 it
happens	 --	 and	 enlightenment	 cannot	 happen	 if	 you	 are	 tense.	 Enlightenment
cannot	happen	if	you	live	in	desires,	in	the	future.	Enlightenment	is	possible	only
when	you	are	desireless,	relaxed,	utterly	herenow.	So	it	cannot	be	made	an	object
of	 desire.	 To	 make	 it	 an	 object	 of	 desire	 is	 to	 miss	 the	 point	 from	 the	 very
beginning.	 It	 is	 pure	 understanding	 that	 we	 are	 already	 in	 that	 space,	 we	 just
don't	look	in.	We	have	not	lost	it,	we	have	only	forgotten	it.
The	 early	 Christians	 used	 to	 call	 themselves	 bearers	 of	 the	 Christ,	 carriers	 of
Christ	in	the	heart.	The	ordinary,	so-called	Christian	also	carries	Christ	--	but	in
the	head,	not	in	the	heart.	to	understand	it	is	of	great	significance.
Carrying	 Christ	 in	 your	 head	 is	 absolutely	 meaningless.	 And	 that's	 what
Christians	are	doing,	and	others	are	doing	the	same:	Hindus	carrying	Krishna	in
the	head,	Buddhists	carrying	Buddha	in	the	head.	And	these	are	not	things	of	the
head,	 these	 are	 not	 thoughts.	 These	 are	 deep,	 deep	 experiences,	 profound
feelings.	They	can	happen	only	in	the	heart.	And	when	they	happen	in	the	heart
you	 don't	 become	 a	 Christian,	 you	 become	 a	 Christ.	 You	 don't	 become	 a
Buddhist,	you	become	a	Buddha.
It	is	ugly	to	be	a	Buddhist	or	a	Christian.	When	you	can	be	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ,
why	 settle	 for	 being	 a	Christian	 or	 a	Buddhist?	That	 is	 settling	 for	 something
plastic,	something	pseudo.
Christ	 is	 a	 state	 of	 consciousness,	 just	 as	 Buddha	 is	 a	 state	 of	 consciousness.
Really,	the	state	of	consciousness	that	in	the	East	is	called	Buddha,	in	the	West	is
called	 Christ.	 It	 is	 not	 different,	 only	 the	 language	 differs,	 but	 both	 words
indicate	 the	same	 flowering.	Your	heart	becomes	a	 flower,	a	 lotus,	and	a	great
fragrance	is	released.	That	fragrance	is	bliss.
So	remember,	don't	allow	sannyas	to	become	part	of	your	head.	Let	it	go	down
deep	into	your	heart.	The	relationship	with	me	has	to	be	of	the	heart,	not	of	the
head.	The	heady	people	are	going	to	miss	me	totally.
They	may	think	that	they	understand	me	but	they	understand	only	words.	They
don't	understand	me.
Only	the	people	of	the	heart	are	going	to	be	my	people,	because	only	they	will
be	able	to	understand	that	which	cannot	be	understood.	Only	they	will	be	able	to
comprehend	that	which	is	incomprehensible.
The	mysteries	can	only	be	revealed	to	 those	who	have	chopped	off	 their	heads
completely,	who	are	no	more	heads	but	just	pure	hearts.
Man	 is	 not	 as	 small	 as	 he	 appears.	He	 is	 vast,	 he	 is	 tremendously	 vast.	He	 is
oceanic.	Even	 the	ocean	has	boundaries,	and	man	has	no	boundaries.	Even	 the
ocean	is	not	so	vast.	Man's	vastness	is	the	only	proof	that	God	is.	God	is	another
name	 for	 man's	 vastness.	 We	 are	 not	 confined	 to	 the	 body	 and	 we	 are	 not
confined	to	the	mind	either.	We	are	beyond	both.
The	whole	process	of	sannyas	is	that	of	peeling	an	onion.	There	are	many	layers
of	identification,	and	we	have	to	drop	all	the	layers	slowly	slowly	slowly.	Finally
nothing	is	left	--	that	nothing	is	you.
Only	nothing	can	be	vast.	Something	is	bound	to	be	infinite.	Only	nothingness	is
infinite;	hence	God	is	ultimate	nothingness.	God	is	not	a	being	but	the	ultimate
non-being.	He	is	not	somebody,	he	is	absolute	nobodiness.	He	is	only	a	presence,
infinite,	unbounded.	and	so	are	we.	we	are	not	different	from	god.	We	are	part	of
that	infinity.
Everyone	is	a	god.	Nobody	can	be	anything	else	because	only	God	exists.	God	is
synonymous	with	existence.	To	be	means	to	be	a	god.	But	we	don't	remember	it,
we	are	absolutely	oblivious	to	it.	So	the	question	is	not	how	to	achieve	godhood,
the	question	is	how	to	remember	it.	It	is	a	forgotten	language.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 to	 remember	 something	 that	 is	 already	 there.
Nothing	has	to	be	achieved.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	have	only	to	discover	yourself,	to	discover	who	you	are,	and	you	will	know
that	you	are	God.	And	the	moment	you	know	you	are	God	the	whole	existence
becomes	divine,	then	everybody	is	god.	And	that	day	is	of	tremendous	joy,	when
the	whole	existence	looks	divine	to	you.	You	are	surrounded	by	gods.	Naturally,
great	rejoicing	arises	in	your	heart.
From	the	very	beginning	we	are	that	which	we	have	been	seeking	all	along.	We
are	already	that	for	which	we	are	looking	everywhere.	It	is	our	self-nature.	Truth,
bliss,	freedom,	God	-	they	are	different	names	of	our	self-nature.
One	need	not	go	anywhere,	one	has	only	 to	dig	within	oneself.	On	 the	outside
one	will	find	only	frustration,	failure.	You	cannot	find	that	which	can	fulfill	you.
Yes,	one	can	have	as	much	money	as	one	wants,	one	can	have	a	great	kingdom
like	 Alexander,	 Napoleon,	 but	 one	 still	 remains	 a	 beggar,	 still	 seeking	 and
searching.	There	seems	to	be	no	fulfillment	through	power,	prestige,	money.	And
the	reason	is	not	that	fulfillment	is	not	possible.
Sigmund	Freud	says	 that	 it	 is	not	possible	because	he	never	 looked	within.	He
says	 that	man	 is	destined	 to	 remain	miserable,	 so	all	 that	we	can	do	 is	 to	help
him	to	be	a	 little	 less	miserable.	We	can	help	him	 to	understand	his	misery,	 to
accept	 it,	and	 live	with	 it	and	not	 to	make	much	fuss	about	 it.	 It	 is	how	things
are.
That	is	the	whole	understanding	of	modern	psychology.	It	is	pessimistic	for	the
simple	reason,	 that	 it	has	not	yet	been	able	to	penetrate	 into	the	inner	world	of
man.
That's	 where	 religion	 differs.	 Religion	 says	 that	 it	 is	 true	 that	 there	 is	 no
contentment	on	 the	outside,	 that	 is	 never	possible.	But	 there	 is	 an	 inner	world
too.	There	is	no	need	to	overlook	it,	there	is	no	need	to	ignore	it.	To	ignore	it	is
only	ignorance.
Sannyas	means	not	ignoring	the	inner.	On	the	contrary,	it	 is	giving	it	more	and
more	 attention,	 more	 and	 more	 awareness,	 more	 and	 more	 exploration.	 And
when	 you	 start	 getting	 deeper	 into	 your	 own	 interiority	 you	 are	 surprised,
because	 you	 discover	 an	 inexhaustible	 treasure.	 Your	 life	 becomes	 a	 joy,	 a
benediction,	a	blessing,	not	only	to	yourself	but	to	others	too.
White	 has	 always	 symbolised	 the	 ultimate	 flowering	 of	 spirituality	 because
white	 is	 the	 synthesis	 of	 all	 the	 colours.	 It	 is	 all	 the	 colours	 in	 deep	 harmony
dancing	 together,	merging,	melting,	meeting	 in	 each	 other	 so	 deeply	 that	 they
disappear	as	separate	colours	and	an	new	colour	arises	--	that	is	white.
Black	 is	 the	 absence	 of	 all	 colours,	 white	 is	 presence	 of	 all	 colours.	 Black
represents	the	devil	because	it	 is	absence;	hence	in	all	 the	mythologies	the	evil
force,	the	devil,	satan,	is	depicted	as	black,	dark,	absolutely	dark.
God	 is	white	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	God	 is	 the	ultimate	 harmony.	Light	 is
white,	but	passing	through	a	prism	it	becomes	seven	colours;	the	prism	divides
it.	That's	how	 the	 rainbow	 is	created.	 In	 the	 rainy	season	small	drops	of	water
hang	 in	 the	air	and	 the	sunrays	passing	 through	 those	small	drops	of	 rainwater
create	the	rainbow.
Mix	all	 the	seven	colours	 in	 the	right	proportion	and	white	arises.	The	number
seven	is	also	significant.
There	 are	 seven	 planes	 of	 consciousness.	The	 lowest	 is	 sex	 and	 the	 highest	 is
samadhi.	In	the	lowest	centre,	at	the	lowest	plane,	there	is	only	sexuality,	nothing
else.	On	the	second	plane	there	are	two	things,	on	the	third	there	are	three,	and
so	on,	 so	 forth.	On	 the	 seventh	plane	all	 the	 seven	energies	meet	 together	and
merge	together	and	a	white	lotus	opens	in	your	being.	These	are	all	metaphors.
The	 white	 lotus	 is	 worshipped	 in	 the	 East.	 You	 must	 have	 seen	 pictures	 of
Buddha	sitting	on	a	white	lotus.	When	you	have	reached	the	ultimate	peak,	when
all	your	energies	have	come	to	a	harmony	great	beauty	descends,	great	silence
descends,	a	new	kind	of	dance	enters	into	your	being,	a	new	celebration,	because
it	is	a	new	birth.
Keep	 remembering	 that	 the	 white	 lotus	 is	 our	 ultimate	 goal,	 that	 we	 have	 to
become	white	lotuses	in	which	all	energies	have	been	consumed,	absorbed	into
one	 synthesis,	 when	 all	 the	 seven	 notes	 of	 music	 have	 created	 the	 ultimate
melody.
Kent	is	a	beautiful	name.	It	means	that	you	disappear	as	many	and	you	become
one,	you	become	 integrated,	 centred.	You	put	 the	prism	of	 the	mind	aside	and
you	are	white.
White	 symbolises	 freedom,	 freedom	 from	 division,	 from	 split.	 white	 also
symbolises	 wholeness.	 Red	 is	 only	 one	 colour,	 blue	 is	 one	 colour,	 green	 is
another.	Green	is	not	the	whole,	blue	is	not	the	whole;	no	colour	is	whole	except
white.
God	 is	 whole,	 god	 is	 another	 name	 for	 totality;	 hence	 those	 who	 have
experienced	god	have	experienced	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
him	as	a	tremendous	whiteness	arising	in	themselves.	They	become	lost	in	that
dazzling	 white.	 The	 mystics	 say	 that	 it	 is	 as	 if	 thousands	 of	 suns	 have	 risen
suddenly.	It	is	all	light	and	all	white.
The	 journey	of	 sannyas	 is	 from	mind	 to	no-mind.	Mind	means	many,	no-mind
means	one,	and	to	be	one	is	to	be	whole,	healthy,	sane.	to	be	one	is	to	be	blissful.
It	is	with	the	many	that	conflict	and	misery	arises.
For	centuries	manliness	has	been	praised.	It	is	time	to	drop	that	whole	nonsense.
It	is	because	of	that	praise	that	humanity	has	suffered	much.
Manly	 qualities	 are	 aggressive,	 violent.	 We	 should	 start	 praising	 feminine
qualities.	The	most	feminine	quality	is	receptivity,	openness,	vulnerability.	Man
has	dominated	long	enough	and	that	domination	has	been	destructive	of	all	that
is	fragile,	beautiful,	of	all	that	is	flowerlike.	Only	rocks	have	remained,	flowers
have	disappeared.
My	whole	effort	here	is	to	praise	the	feminine	qualities.	The	world	needs	them.
If	I	love	Buddha,	Jesus,	Krishna,	the	most	fundamental	reason	for	my	love	is	that
they	are	all	feminine,	they	are	not	masculine.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 has	 condemned	Buddha	 and	Christ	 for	 the	 same	 reason	 --
they	 are	 not	manly	 enough.	 I	 praise	 them	 for	 the	 same	 reason	 --	 they	 are	 not
manly	enough.	That	is	good;	they	have	a	grace,	the	feminine	grace.
We	have	to	change	the	whole	gestalt	of	human	consciousness.	we	have	to	make
it	more	surrendering,	more	receptive,	we	have	to	teach	it	how	to	relax	and	how
things	can	happen	in	a	deep	let-go.	all	that	is	great
--	truth,	love,	bliss,	god,	freedom	--	happens	in	a	state	of	let-go.	You	cannot	force
them	to	happen.	that	is	not	possible,	that	is	not	i	the	nature	of	things	at	all.
You	can	only	be	a	host,	you	can	only	be	pregnant	with	those	qualities,	you	can
allow	then	to	happen.
Don't	hinder,	that's	all	that	you	can	do.	Keep	the	doors	open,	keep	the	heart	open,
and	you	become	a	song.
God	 starts	 singing	 through	 you.	 You	 become	 a	 joyous	 spirit,	 you	 become	 a
celebration.
A	strong	spirit	is	always	a	gift	of	God,	the	most	precious	gift.	He	gives	a	strong
spirit	to	everybody.	God	is	absolutely	generous,	he	gives	more	than	you	will	ever
need.	He	gives	courage,	he	gives	strength.
But	the	society	turns	every	possibility	into	its	opposite.	Rather	than	making	you
more	and	more	courageous,	helping	your	courage,	strengthening	your	courage,	it
destroys	 it,	 it	makes	you	cowardly.	The	 same	energy	 that	 can	become	courage
can	become	fear.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	headstand:	put	everything	upside	down.
The	society	has	learned	the	art	of	creating	cowardliness	in	people	because	only
cowards	can	be	dominated.	The	society	destroys	the	individual	in	every	possible
way,	because	the	society	is	afraid	of	the	individual.
The	individual	cannot	always	be	obedient,	he	will	be	obedient	when	he	feels	that
it	 is	 right	 to	be	obedient.	But	you	cannot	 rely	on	him.	Sometimes	he	may	 feel
that	this	is	not	right,	then	he	will	defy	all	your	orders,	he	will	say	no.	He	will	live
through	his	own	inner	light.	He	cannot	be	commanded,	he	cannot	be	reduced	to	a
soldier,	he	cannot	function	like	a	machine.	He	will	say	yes	when	he	feels	that	it
is	right,	 it	will	come	from	his	own	heart.	But	he	will	never	be	a	yea-sayer,	nor
will	he	be	a	no-sayer.	He	will	not	cling	to	no	or	yes,	he	will	remain	free.	Every
moment	he	will	choose	whether	to	say	yes	or	no.	He	will	not	function	out	of	a
conditioned	mind	--	conditioned	for	yes	or	conditioned	for	no.
The	 society	 does	 not	 want	 individuals.	 The	 society	 lives	 on	 the	 death	 of
individuals.	 So	 the	 more	 a	 society	 becomes	 organised,	 the	 more	 and	 more
individuals	 disappear.	 For	 example,	 in	 Adolf	 Hitler's	 Germany,	 individuals
completely	 disappeared	 because	 the	 society	 was	 too	 organised.	 The	 whole
society	 was	 turned	 into	 a	 military	 camp.	 That	 has	 happened	 many	 times.	 In
ancient	days	in	Japan,	 the	whole	society	was	turned	into	a	military	camp.	That
was	the	highest	value,	to	be	obedient.
All	 the	 churches	 also	 teach	 obedience	 because	 the	 priest	 is	 afraid	 of
individuality,	 because	 the	 individual	 raises	 awkward	 questions	 which	 nobody
else	 can	 answer.	 The	 individual	 creates	 restlessness	 in	 the	 status	 quo.	 The
individual	creates	embarrassing	situations	for	the	people	who	are	in	power,	who
are	in	authority.
They	may	be	popes	or	kings	or	presidents	or	prime	ministers,	 it	doesn't	matter.
Religious	heads	or	political	heads,	it	doesn't	matter.	Every	establishment	is	afraid
of	individuals.	And	the	only	way	to	destroy	the	individual	is	 to	turn	the	gift	of
God	into	a	curse.
My	effort	here	is	to	remind	you	that	you	can	still	change	your	whole	pattern,	you
can	still	put	things	as	they	should	be.	You	can	still	be	courageous,	adventurous.
You	can	still	be	strong	in	spirit,	because	it	is	only	those	who	are	strong	in	spirit
who	can	travel	the	path	to	God.
Katja	means	purity	--	the	purity	that	you	see	in	the	stars,	the	purity	that	you	see
in	the	flowers,	the	purity	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that	you	see	in	the	song	of	the	birds...	 that	purity.	and	man	can	become	all.	He
can	be	a	flower	full	of	fragrance.	He	can	be	a	star	full	of	light.	And	he	can	be	a
bird	singing	in	praise	of	God,	in	praise	of	sunrise.
Man	has	multi-dimensional	potential.	He	can	be	the	whole	universe.
Man	is	capable	of	so	much	but	he	is	not	aware	of	it.	He	is	capable	of	flying	but
he	goes	on	just	crawling	on	the	earth.	He	is	capable	of	becoming	pure	love	but
he	 remains	 only	 animal,	 lust.	 He	 is	 capable	 of	 becoming	 pure	 spirit	 but	 he
remains	 just	dust.	We	are	not	aware	of	our	own	potential.	We	don't	know	how
much	we	are	carrying	within	ourselves	which	can	be	realised	any	moment	 that
we	decide	to	realise	it.	But	it	will	not	be	realised	unless	we	decide	to	realise	it.
Many	 people	 die	 without	 knowing	 that	 they	 were	 carrying	 a	 treasure	 within
themselves.	they	die	like	beggars	and	they	were	meant	to	be	emperors.
Out	ultimate	expression	is	divine	love,	and	out	of	that	is	all	creativity,	all	service,
all	compassion.	Out	of	that	much	happens,	but	we	have	to	be	alert	to	create	the
right	space	in	which	our	potential	can	become	actual.
Sannyas	is	only	a	methodology	to	create	a	space,	a	certain	space	within	you,	to
prepare	the	ground	so	that	your	seeds	starts	sprouting.	It	is	just	a	process	of	inner
gardening.	 And	 each	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 become	 a	 garden	 with	 many	 flowers,
much	perfume.	It	is	possible,	I	am	not	talking	about	the	impossible.	It	is	within
our	reach,	we	just	have	to	start	groping	for	 it.	And	my	function	here	is	 to	help
you	to	grope	in	the	right	direction.
Once	you	are	on	the	right	track	then	miracles	start	happening.
[There	 follows	 an	 interview	 with	 Ma	 Deva	 Tanmayo,	 which	 is	 not	 included
here.]
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	Love
9	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002095
ShortTitle:	WITHME09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
You	have	to	become	more	conscious	so	that	you	can	discover	your	lovingness,
so	 that	 you	 can	 discover	 the	 lovingness	 of	 the	whole	 existence	 and	 once	 you
know,	 you	 start	 sharing.	 Then	 it	 is	 not	 a	 relationship,	 not	 that	 you	 love
somebody,	but	a	state:	you	love.	You	are	love,	rather.
In	seeking	love,	you	will	find	not	only	love,	you	will	find	your	true	being	too.
I	 am	 talking	 about	 a	 love	 that	 is	 beyond	your	 so-called	 love	 and	 I	 am	 talking
about	a	bliss	that	is	beyond	every	possible	idea	of	bliss	that	you	can	have.	I	am
talking	 about	 a	 god	 which	 is	 neither	 Christian	 nor	 Hindu	 nor	 Mohammedan,
which	is	really	incomprehensible.	I	am	talking	about	mysteries	which	cannot	be
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
expressed	adequately	in	any	words,	which	are	intrinsically	inexpressible.	Love	is
one	of	those	mysteries.
We	know	a	love	that	is	not	love;	it	 is	something	else.	It	 is	biology,	physiology,
chemistry,	 but	 not	 love,	 It	 is	 instinctive,	 and	 anything	 instinctive	 is	 something
unconscious.	Anything	instinctive	makes	you	a	slave.
And	the	whole	effort	of	sannyas	is	to	make	everything	conscious.
When	 your	 love	 becomes	 conscious	 the	 other	 side	 of	 it,	 the	 hatred	 side,
disappears.	No	jealousy	is	found	in	it,	no	possessiveness,	no	domination.	It	is	no
more	 an	 ego	 trip.	 When	 love	 becomes	 part	 of	 your	 awareness	 it	 is	 a	 totally
different	phenomenon.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	ordinary	love.	The	ordinary
love	is	an	effort	to	somehow	fulfil	your	emptiness,	to	somehow	not	be	lonely,	to
remain	occupied	with	the	other;	it	is	a	biological	occupation	with	the	other.	And
the	other	is	also	doing	the	same	with	you:	both	of	you	are	using	the	other	so	that
you	are	not	lonely.
When	 love	 becomes	 conscious	 it	 is	 not	 an	 effort	 to	 avoid	 loneliness;	 on	 the
contrary	 it	 flows	 out	 of	 your	 aloneness.	You	 are	 perfectly	 joyous	 being	 alone,
you	are	so	joyous	that	you	want	to	share	it.	Conscious	love	is	a	sharing:	you	give
because	it	is	coming	to	you	in	such	abundance	that	you	becomes	burdened	like	a
raincloud	--	it	has	to	shower	somewhere.
The	ordinary	love	comes	out	of	your	emptiness,	not	out	of	your	fullness.	You	are
afraid	to	face	your	loneliness.	Whenever	your	are	left	alone	you	don't	know	what
to	 do	with	 yourself.	You	 are	 so	 afraid	 of	 yourself,	 you	 hate	 your	 company	 so
much	that	you	are	ready	to	be	with	anybody,	even	with	a	prostitute.
And	people	call	this	love.	They	are	using	such	a	beautiful	name,	such	a	beautiful
word	to	hide	very	ugly	things.
When	 I	 use	 the	word	 "love"	 I	mean	 conscious	 love.	 Consciousness	 is	 always
implied:	 whether	 I	 say	 bliss,	 joy,	 celebration,	 love,	 peace,	 consciousness	 is
always	there.	Without	it	nothing	is	possible.
You	have	to	become	more	conscious	so	that	you	can	discover	your	lovingness,
so	 that	you	can	discover	 the	 lovingness	of	 the	whole	existence.	And	once	you
know,	 you	 start	 sharing.	But	 then	you	 simply	 share	 unconditionally;	 you	don't
ask	for	anything	in	return.	You	are	grateful	just	to	share,	you	are	thankful	just	to
share.	It	is	sharing	for	sharing's	sake.	You	are	not	using	the	other.
Then	 love	 has	 a	 height,	 a	 Himalayan	 height;	 then	 you	 are	 moving	 on	 virgin
heights.	 The	 purity	 of	 it	 is	 immense,	 overwhelming,	 and	 the	 ecstasy	 of	 it	 is
inexhaustible.	Then	it	is	not	a	relationship	--	not	that	you	love	somebody	--	but	a
state.	You	love,	you	are	love,	rather.
Love	 has	 three	 dimensions.	 One	 is	 animal	 love	 --	 absolutely	 unconscious,
instinctive,	 biological.	 The	 second	 is	 human	 love	 --	 a	 little	 higher	 than	 the
biological,	 a	 little	 more	 psychological,	 a	 little	 higher	 than	 instinct.	 It	 has
something	of	intelligence	in	it,	a	little	more	refined	than	the	crude	biological,	the
instinctive.
But	still	it	is	not	the	highest.	There	is	still	one	more	dimension	--	that	is	divine
love	--	which	is	spiritual.
Man	has	three	layers.	first	is	his	physiology,	second	is	his	psychology,	third	is	his
spirit,	his	soul,	his	real	being.
One	 can	 seek	 bodily	 pleasures.	 That's	 what	 millions	 of	 people	 go	 on	 doing.
Nothing	is	wrong	in	it,	but	it	is	a	little	stupid.	Not	a	sin,	but	it	is	as	if	you	have
been	given	a	big	palace	to	live	in	and	you	go	on	living	on	the	porch.	You	never
enter	into	the	palace,	so	you	have	completely	forgotten	about	it.	You	have	made
the	porch	your	whole	life.	And	the	palace	is	waiting	for	you,	and	it	is	yours,	you
just	have	to	explore	a	little	bit	deeper.
Very	few	people	enter	into	human	love.	Those	are	the	people	who	are	sensitive,
alert,	 intelligent,	who	have	some	sense	of	poetry	in	 life,	some	aesthetic	values,
for	whom	sex	in	itself	is	not	of	much	value	unless	it	is	rooted	in	love,	for	whom
to	 be	 under	 the	 influence	 of	 chemistry	 and	 hormones	 looks	 like	 slavery.	They
will	go	into	a	sexual	relationship	but	only	when	there	is	a	higher	intimacy.
Sex	can	be	shared	but	not	as	an	end	unto	itself.	It	can	only	be	a	small	part	of	the
whole	 phenomenon	 of	 love.	 Then	 it	 has	 also	 a	 beauty,	 if	 it	 is	 part	 of	 a	 love
energy.
And	only	once	in	a	while	ever	fewer	--	a	Buddha,	a	Jesus,	a	Lao-Tzu	--	reach	to
the	 third.	 The	 third	 is	 not	 a	 relationship	 at	 all.	 Divine	 love	 is	 a	 state,	 not	 a
relationship.
In	the	first	you	are	not	concerned	with	the	individual.	You	can	see	it	in	animals.
There	 is	no	concern	for	 the	 individual,	 it	 is	a	pure	sexual	urge.	Any	male,	any
female	will	meet	and	then	they	will	separate	forever.
They	will	not	say	even	a	thank-you.	No	gratefulness,	no	intimacy	arises.	That's
the	case	with	many	human	beings	also,	and	if	that	is	the	case	those	human	beings
are	not	yet	human;	they	are	still	living	an	animal	life.
Their	bodies	are	human	but	they	don't	have	human	souls	yet.	It	is	not	personal.
The	 animal	 love	 is	 impersonal,	 human	 love	 is	 personal.	 You	 love	 a	 certain
person	 and	 then	 intimacy	grows.	And	 then	 for	 you	 there	 is	 nobody	 else.	Your
whole	world	revolves	around	that	person.	You	cannot	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
conceive	of	yourself	making	love	to	somebody	else.	Yes,	you	can	be	friendly,	but
love	 becomes	 a	 very	 intimate	 phenomenon.	 It	 will	 be	 sacrilegious	 to	 you,
profane,	ugly,	to	move	into	sex	with	each	and	everybody.	It	will	be	falling	back
to	the	animal	level.
The	human	level	is	personal	and	the	divine	love	is	impersonal,	on	a	higher	plane.
Animals	 are	 impersonal	 because	 they	 are	 unconscious	 and	 Buddhas	 are
impersonal	because	 they	are	absolutely	conscious.	They	don't	 love	anybody	 in
particular,	they	simply	love.	The	animal	love	is	not	love	at	all	but	only	sex.	And
the	love	of	a	Buddha	is	not	sex	at	all,	it	is	only	love.
Man	is	just	between	the	two:	half	animal,	half	divine.	His	love	is	both	something
of	 the	 beyond	 and	 something	 of	 the	 below.	 Hence	 human	 love	 is	 a	 tense
phenomenon,	it	is	a	sort	of	anxiety.	One	is	pulled	apart.	The	lower	and	the	higher
are	both	trying	to	catch	hold	of	us;	hence	human	love	is	painful.	But	one	has	to
grow	 through	 it;	 that	 pain	 is	 a	 necessary	 part	 of	 maturity.	 But	 one	 should
remember	that	one	has	to	reach	beyond	it.
When	one	is	in	the	state	of	divine	love	one	is	simply	love.	There	is	no	question
of	 preference,	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 loving	 this	 person	 or	 that.	 Whosoever
comes	to	a	Buddha	is	filled	with	his	love.	His	love	is	constantly	showering.	Even
when	he	is	sitting	alone	he	vibrates	love.	That's	the	ultimate,	that	is	the	goal	of
sannyas.
And	 only	 the	 ultimate	 can	 fulfil.	 Only	 the	 ultimate	 can	 bring	 you	 absolute
contentment.	Only	the	ultimate	can	be	a	blessing	and	a	benediction.
Man's	basic	search	is	for	love.	He	wants	to	love	and	he	wants	to	be	loved	and	he
wants	to	be	loved	with	no	motive,	with	no	ulterior	motive.	He	wants	to	be	loved
unconditionally,	and	he	can	feel	fulfilled	only	when	that	happens.	But	it	does	not
happen	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	he	wants	 to	be	 loved	unconditionally	but	he
never	loves	anybody	unconditionally.
You	 don't	 create	 the	 right	 space,	 everything	 goes	 wrong,	 from	 your	 side
something	is	missing	and	the	same	is	the	case	with	the	other	person,	from	his	or
her	side	something	is	essentially	missing.	All	lovers	are	expecting	unconditional
love	from	the	other	and	nobody	is	ready	to	give	it.	So	how	can	it	happen?	One
has	to	begin	with	oneself,	one	has	to	take	the	initiative.
So	 in	 being	 as	 sannyasin	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 work	 upon	 yourself,	 love
unconditionally,	 not	 only	 people	 but	 trees,	 animals,	 clouds.	 Go	 on	 spreading
your	love,	make	it	huge,	enormous.	Let	it	spread	to	the	whole.
The	day	that	you	can	love	the	whole	without	in	any	way	asking	for	anything	in
return	 you	 will	 have	 known	 what	 prayer	 is	 and	 you	 will	 have	 known	 what
worship	is	and	you	will	have	known	the	most	fundamental	secret	of	life,	because
you	will	 be	 showered	with	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 blessings.	 The	whole	 universe
will	start	pouring	its	love	energy	over	you.	And	that	is	the	moment	we	have	been
seeking	and	 searching	 for	 for	 lives	 together,	but	missing	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	we	never	create	the	right	space	for	it	to	happen.	Sannyas	has	to	become	the
right	space	for	love	to	happen.
All	 these	 ultimate	 experiences	 of	 surrender,	 of	 worship,	 of	 devotion,	 of
consecration,	are	possible	only	if	the	heart	is	full	of	love.	They	are	all	flowers	of
love.	without	love	there	is	no	possibility	of	knowing	God.
Without	love	there	is	no	bridge.	Logic	is	a	barrier,	love	is	a	bridge	--	and	we	live
in	logic.
The	 stupidity	 of	 our	minds	 is	 such	 that	we	 have	 even	made	God	 an	 object	 of
logic.	We	 have	 created	 a	 whole	 philosophy	 around	 the	 idea,	 we	 have	 created
theology.	 Theology	 means	 logic	 about	 God.	 That	 is	 the	 most	 absurd	 thing
possible,	 the	most	absurd	 thing	conceivable.	There	can	be	no	 logic	about	God,
only	love.
Logic	is	something	outgoing.	It	is	needed	in	the	world,	it	is	a	perfect	instrument
for	 scientific	 investigation,	 for	 objective	 observation.	 but	 it	 is	 not	 helpful	 in
going	in,	it	prevents	it.
And	God	is	within	you.	God	is	not	an	object,	God	is	your	very	subjectivity,	your
very	interiority.
One	has	to	drop	logic	and	one	has	to	learn	the	ways	of	love	more	and	more.	The
question	 is	 not	 what	 you	 love,	 that	 is	 not	 so	 important.	 Love	 people,	 love
animals,	 love	 trees,	 love	nature,	poetry,	music.	That	 is	not	 significant.	What	 is
significant	 is	 that	you	love...	because	by	loving	more	and	more	you	become	it.
The	day	you	become	love,	when	it	becomes	so	natural,	like	breathing,	that	day	is
of	great	rejoicing,	because	God	is	experienced	then	and	only	then.
Our	century	is	one	of	the	most	strange	in	the	whole	history	of	humanity.	People
have	never	felt	such	outsiders	as	they	are	feeling	now.	Everybody	feels	 like	an
stranger,	as	if	they	are	not	needed,	as	if	they	are	only	accidental.	This	feeling	has
arisen	 because	 we	 have	 lost	 contact	 with	 the	 roots	 of	 life.	 We	 are	 the	 most
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
uprooted	people	in	the	whole	of	history;	hence	so	many	people	go	mad,	so	many
people	commit	suicide.
And	 those	 who	 don't	 go	 mad	 and	 don't	 commit	 suicide	 are	 not	 in	 a	 better
situation	either.	Their	life	is	a	long	long	hell,	they	drag	just	somehow.	They	also
contemplate	 committing	 suicide	but	 they	cannot	gather	 courage.	They	are	 also
many	 times	 just	on	 the	brink	of	going	crazy	but	 somehow	 they	go	on	holding
themselves	 together.	 It	 is	 such	 a	 strain	 that	 although	 they	 remain	 normal	 deep
down	 they	 go	 on	 repressing	 many	 many	 abnormal	 things,	 many	 perversions,
obsessions.
So	 everybody	who	 looks	 normal	 on	 the	 surface	 is	 just	 normal	 on	 the	 surface;
deep	 down	 he	 is	 as	 abnormal	 as	 any	 insane	 person.	 Any	 every	 person	 is	 a
potential	insane	person.	He	carries	the	potentiality,	he	can	go	crazy	any	moment.
This	situation	can	be	changed	by	only	one	thing;	if	we	again	start	learning	how
to	connect	ourselves	with	existence.	The	thing	that	is	disconnecting	us	is	the	ego.
We	have	 started	 to	 look	 at	 ourselves	 as	 if	we	 are	 islands	 --	 and	 no	man	 is	 an
island.	We	 are	 all	 part	 of	 a	 vast	 continent.	And	we	 are	 not	 accidental,	we	 are
needed.	 Nobody	 can	 replace	 you.	 You	 are	 absolutely	 essential,	 intrinsically
essential	to	existence.
Once	 this	 is	 felt	 a	great	grounding	happens.	As	you	go	deeper	 into	meditation
you	become	aware	that	the	existence	loves	you,	that	it	is	showering	many	many
blessings	every	moment.	Then	you	don't	take	them	for	granted,	you	start	feeling
grateful.	And	slowly	slowly	you	feel	that	there	is	great	love	flowing	towards	you
from	 every	 direction.	 In	 that	 moment,	 when	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 feel	 love
flowing	from	all	directions,	pouring	into	your	being,	the	soul	is	born.	One	really
becomes	a	soul,	otherwise	 the	soul	 is	 just	an	 idea.	The	soul	 is	born	only	when
feel	 that	 god	 loves	 you.	 And	 by	 god	 I	 simply	mean	 the	 whole.	 God	 is	 not	 a
person	but	another	name	for	the	whole,	a	very	loving	name.
My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	feel	that	existence	is	not	indifferent	towards	you.
It	 is	deeply	concerned	about	you,	 it	 cares	 for	you,	 it	 loves	you.	 and	when	one
feels	 loved	and	cared	 for,	one	 is	 capable	of	 loving	and	caring.	when	existence
pours	its	love	into	you,	you	start	sharing	your	love	with	others.	You	become	so
burdened	 with	 love	 that	 you	 have	 to	 share.	 You	 cannot	 contain	 it,	 it	 is
uncontainable.	It	starts	spreading,	radiating.
That's	what	ecstasy	is.	Ecstasy	is	the	flowering	of	meditation.	Meditation	is	the
beginning,	the	seed;	ecstasy	is	the	flower.	And	by	meditation	I	mean	not	looking
through	the	mind	--	it	is	the	mind	that	cuts	you	away	from	the	world,	but	looking
through	the	heart.	It	is	the	heart	that	joins	you	with	the	world,	it	is	the	heart	that
has	 the	courage	 to	melt	 and	merge	with	 the	whole.	The	mind	 is	 a	coward,	 the
heart	is	really	courageous.
So	move	from	the	mind	to	the	heart,	from	logic	to	love,	from	ego	to	egolessness,
and	then	all	kinds	of	miracles	start	happening	in	your	life.	You	are	entitled	to	all
those	miracles.
It	 is	 love	 and	 nothing	 else	 that	makes	 one	 a	 king.	You	 can	 possess	 the	whole
world	but	you	will	be	a	beggar	if	you	don't	have	love.	And	you	may	not	possess
anything,	you	may	really	be	a	beggar,	but	if	you	have	love	overflowing	love	in
you	heart	you	are	an	emperor,	far	greater	than	any	Alexander	the	Great.
Love	 is	 the	real	 treasure.	Seek	 love	and	 in	seeking	 love	you	will	not	only	find
love,	you	will	find	God	too.	In	seeking	love	you	will	not	only	find	love,	you	will
find	you	true	being	too.	In	seeking	love	one	finds	the	kingdom	of	God,	one	truly
becomes	a	king.
And	love	is	something	that	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.	even	death	cannot
destroy	it.	that's	why	lovers	are	the	only	people	in	the	world	who	are	not	afraid
of	death.	If	a	person	is	afraid	of	death	that	simply	show	that	he	has	not	known
love.	If	you	have	known	love	death	disappears.	If	you	have	not	known	love	then
life	is	nothing	but	death.
Every	 effort	 should	 be	made	 to	 seek	 and	 search	 for	 love.	And	 it	 is	 your	 own
energy.	You	are	not	 to	go	anywhere	else,	you	have	 to	within	yourself,	and	one
day	the	spring	starts	flowering.	You	become	full	of	love,	you	start	overflowing
with	 love.	 In	 that	 moment	 not	 only	 are	 you	 blessed,	 through	 you	 the	 whole
existence	is	blessed.
Your	 name	 will	 mean,	 a	 loving	 solitude,	 a	 solitude	 full	 of	 love,	 and	 a	 love
centred,	rooted	in	solitude.	It	is	one	of	the	most	difficult	things	in	life.	It	is	one	of
the	greatest	challenges.	If	one	accepts	 the	challenge	and	moves	towards	it,	one
grows.	Even	a	single	step	towards	it	is	a	great	leap	of	consciousness.
Why	is	it	difficult?	It	is	difficult	because	to	feel	your	aloneness	and	yet	be	loving
seems	to	be	contradictory	to	the	mind.	The	mind	feels	perfectly	right:	if	you	are
loving,	then	forget	about	your	aloneness,	then	be	lost	in	togetherness.	According
to	the	mind	that's	what	love	is,	it	is	the	meeting	with	the	other.	But	if	you	don't
know	what	aloneness	is,	who	is	going	to	meet	whom?	Two	empty	shells	will	be
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
meeting,	two	bodies	will	be	meeting.	But	unless	two	souls	meet	and	merge	love
never	reaches	to	its	ultimate	crescendo.	And	one	becomes	a	soul	only	when	one
knows	the	beauty	of	being	alone.
The	mind	 is	 ready	 to	say	 that	 if	you	want	 to	be	alone	 then	be	alone,	 forget	all
about	 love.	 The	 mind	 seems	 to	 be	 absolutely	 logical.	 The	 mind	 says	 choose
either	 love	 or	 aloneness,	 and	 those	who	 have	 followed	 the	mind	 have	 chosen
either	one	or	the	other.
The	 people	 who	 live	 in	 the	 world,	 the	 majority	 of	 people	 have	 chosen	 love;
hence	they	don't	meditate.
Meditation	seems	to	be	going	against	their	choice,	because	meditation	is	the	art
of	enjoying	your	aloneness.
And	whenever	a	person	will	start	meditating,	if	he	has	a	lover,	the	lover	will	be
antagonistic	to	the	approach.
The	 lover	or	 the	beloved	 is	bound	 to	 create	 trouble.	 fear	 arises,	 because	 if	 the
other	becomes	capable	of	being	alone,	then	what	will	be	the	need	of	love?	"Then
I	 will	 not	 be	 needed	 any	more,"	 that	 is	 the	 fear.	 And	 everybody	 wants	 to	 be
needed.	That	 fulfils	 the	 ego,	 that	 "I	 am	needed,"	 that	 "without	me	you	 cannot
live,"
that	"I	am	absolutely	essential	for	your	life."
A	few	people	have	chosen	to	be	monks	and	nuns.	They	have	moved	away	from
the	world	--	the	world	of	love	and	togetherness	and	relationship.	They	live	alone.
That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	the	word	"monk":	one	who	lives	alone,	but	without
love	you	cannot	be	 joyous.	And	 the	world	 is	 in	misery.	You	can	be	 loving	but
without	knowing	your	aloneness	your	love	remains	superficial.
I	 teach	 something	 very	 paradoxical.	 I	 teach	 you	 love	 and	 aloneness	 together.
Love	deeply	and	be	alone	deeply.	Let	love	arise	out	of	you	solitude.	Then	it	will
be	 something	 divine,	 something	 supramundane,	 something	 of	 the	 beyond,
something	 that	 will	 fill	 you	 with	 contentment	 and	 light	 and	 bliss	 and
benediction.
Hence	my	sannyasins	are	not	 to	 leave	the	world.	They	have	to	be	 in	 the	world
and	 yet	 be	 alone,	 they	 have	 to	 be	 in	 relationships	 and	 yet	 remain	 alone.	 I	 am
giving	 a	 very	 hard	 task	 to	 be	 fulfilled.	 But	 it	 is	my	 observation	 that	 this	 is	 a
challenge	 worth	 accepting	 because	 it	 can	 bring	 your	 total	 potential	 into
manifestation.	 It	 can	 become	 an	 opportunity	 for	 your	 potential	 to	 become
actualised.
Love	 is	 not	 attachment.	 Love	 flowers	 only	 when	 you	 have	 dropped	 all
attachment.	It	is	because	of	attachment	that	love	is	not	happening	to	millions	of
people.	 Attachment	 creates	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
pathological	 tendencies.	Attachment	 is	out	of	 fear,	one	wants	 to	 cling.	But	 the
moment	you	cling	you	are	creating	trouble	for	yourself	and	the	other.	The	more
you	try	to	cling,	the	more	the	other	will	try	to	escape,	because	nobody	wants	to
carry	 a	 burden,	 nobody	 wants	 to	 become	 unfree,	 nobody	 wants	 to	 lose	 their
freedom.
But	then	a	vicious	circle	is	created:	the	more	you	feel	that	the	other	is	escaping,
the	more	you	cling.	The	more	you	cling,	the	more	the	other	escapes.	And	there	is
no	end	 to	 it	 unless	you	destroy	 the	whole	 relationship.	That's	what	 attachment
does:	 it	 goes	 on	 poisoning	 all	 relationships.	 All	 relationships	 can	 bloom	 into
prayer,	 they	 can	 become	 divine.	 It	 is	 because	 of	 attachment	 that	 they	 become
poisoned.
One	has	to	understand	ones	tendency	to	get	attached.	You	get	attached	to	people,
to	things,	to	places.
There	are	 thousands	possibilities	of	being	attached.	And	 the	more	you	become
attached,	 the	 more	 you	 are	 caught	 in	 the	 web	 that	 you	 have	 created	 around
yourself.	 You	 lose	 your	 freedom,	 you	 lose	 growth,	 you	 lose	 all	 possibility	 of
attaining	to	the	ultimate,	you	become	trivia.	You	become	that	which	you	want	to
possess,	to	which	you	become	attached.
You	 can	 see	 it	 happening.	 If	 a	man	 becomes	 too	 attached	 to	money	 he	 starts
becoming	more	like	money	than	like	a	man.	He	becomes	dead,	dull,	dirty,	 like
currency	 notes	which	 go	 on	moving	 from	one	 hand	 to	 another.	You	 can't	 find
anything	more	dirty	 than	currency	notes.	 If	you	become	 too	attached	 to	 things
you	become	a	thing	because	your	possessions	start	possessing	you.
Sannyas	 means	 learning	 the	 art	 of	 love	 without	 getting	 attached.	 There	 have
been	many	people	who	renounced	attachment	but	they	renounced	love	also.	That
is	throwing	the	baby	out	with	the	bathwater.
They	became	dead	because	without	love	there	is	no	life.	Of	course	they	were	not
attached,	 but	 just	 to	 escape	 from	attachment	 they	dropped	being	 loving	 --	 and
when	 you	 drop	 being	 loving	 you	 have	 to	 become	 hard,	 you	 have	 to	 become
insensitive.	That's	why	your	 so-called	 saints	 are	 so	hard	 and	 so	 insensitive,	 so
dead	--	just	walking	corpses,	that's	all.	They	stink	of	death	not	of	the	perfume	of
life.
My	effort	here	is	to	give	you	a	new	synthesis:	love	without	attachment.
There	 are	 two	 kinds	 of	 people:	 people	 who	 are	 attached,	 but	 because	 of
attachment	 love	 is	 killed.	 Then	 there	 are	 the	 other	 kind	 who	 have	 escaped
attachment	 and	have	dropped	being	 loving	because	 they	 are	 afraid	 that	 if	 they
love	they	will	become	attached.
I	want	the	third	kind	of	man	in	the	world:	one	who	is	capable	of	loving	and	yet
remaining	unattached.
That's	my	definition	of	true	sannyas.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Love	 is	 the	 only	 phenomenon	 which	 is	 immortal.	 Everything	 else	 dies,	 love
never	 dies.	 Death	 overcomes	 everything	 except	 love.	 Love	 overcomes	 death;
hence	in	love	is	our	victory.	The	man	who	lives	without	love	lives	a	life	of	defeat
and	 failure.	 He	 lives	 an	 ugly	 life,	 utterly	 meaningless,	 hollow.	 He	 somehow
drags.	His	life	is	nothing	but	a	slow	suicide.
The	man	who	loves	really	lives,	lives	authentically,	because	love	brings	colour,
love	brings	joy,	love	brings	meaning.	Love	makes	you	significant.	each	moment
becomes	eternity.
Love	 more	 and	 more	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 loving,	 for	 no	 other	 motive.	 Love
unconditionally.	To	put	conditions	on	 love	 is	 like	putting	 legs	on	a	 snake.	The
snake	needs	no	legs.	Don't	help	the	snake	by	putting	legs	on	him,	otherwise	you
will	destroy	him.	Love	needs	no	motives,	it	is	an	end	unto	itself.
Love	is	the	greatest	blessing	in	life.	There	is	no	higher	blessing	than	love.	If	one
can	 love	 then	 everything	 is	 possible,	 even	 the	 impossible	 is	 possible.	 Then
miracles	 start	 happening,	 unimaginable	 joys	 become	 yours.	 Incredible	 insights
suddenly	grow	in	your	inner	being,	windows	open	up	into	mysteries.
doors	which	you	had	never	suspected	existed	within	you	open	and	you	can	see
the	multi-dimensionality	of	existence.	But	it	happens	through	love.
Love	is	not	to	be	tethered	to	somebody	in	particular.	Love	should	become	a	state,
love	should	be	a	state	of	 loving.	One	should	be	loveful,	not	 that	one	loves	this
person	 or	 that	 person.	 One	 should	 be	 the	 very	 energy	 called	 love	 so	 that
wherever	one	is	one	is	showering	love.
When	it	becomes	so	natural,	so	spontaneous	that	even	in	your	sleep	you	radiate
love,	you	have	attained	 to	god.	 In	 that	moment	 love	and	god	are	 synonymous.
Hence	I	call	it	the	greatest	blessing.	Love	is	not	only	a	blessing	to	the	person	to
whom	it	happens,	it	is	also	a	blessing	to	the	whole	world	through	him.
When	you	are	blessed	you	can	bless	the	whole	world.	And	that	is	real	service	to
humanity,	to	existence.
The	eagle	represents	three	things:	power,	might,	courage	and	strength.
Love	needs	all	 these	qualities	 to	bloom.	A	cowardly	heart	cannot	love.	Love	is
the	greatest	adventure	in	life,	the	most	dangerous.	The	journey	is	full	of	hazards.
And	the	danger	 is	 that	you	are	moving	towards	 the	heights;	 if	you	fall	you	are
gone	 forever.	 The	 higher	 you	 move,	 the	 more	 is	 the	 danger.	 And	 love	 is	 the
highest	 peak	 in	 life,	 it	 is	 like	 everest.	 It	 needs	 great	 courage,	 guts.	 It	 needs
adventurousness	to	move	into	the	unknown.
Love	takes	you	towards	 the	further	shore	without	any	map,	without	any	guide,
without	even	any	guidelines.	And	love	takes	you	in	a	very	small	boat.	The	sea	is
there	with	all	 its	 turmoil	and	you	are	moving	in	a	small	boat,	you	can't	see	the
other	 shore.	 But	 you	 are	 in	 deep	 trust,	 knowing	 that	 existence	 protects	 you,
trusting	that	existence	cares	for	you,	that	even	if	you	are	drowned	in	the	middle
there	is	nothing	to	worry	about.	It	is	better	to	be	drowned	in	search	of	love	than
to	live	a	long	life	without	love.	Because	even	a	single	moment	of	love	is	more
valuable	than	a	hundred	years	without	love.
It	needs	a	certain	inner	strength,	a	certain	spiritual	strength	to	be	in	love,	because
love	demands	the	almost	impossible.	It	demands	unconditional	surrender	of	the
ego.	 It	demands	 that	you	disappear.	 It	demands	 that	you	be	nothing,	a	nobody,
because	only	when	you	are	a	nobody,	a	nothingness,	are	you	empty	enough	for
love	to	rush	in,	to	fill	you,	every	pore	of	your	being.	If	you	are	too	full	of	the	ego
love	has	no	space	to	enter	you.
And	 the	 eagle	 is	 a	 beautiful	 metaphor.	 It	 soars	 the	 highest.	 It	 crosses	 the
boundaries	of	 the	known.	It	goes	on	moving	farther	and	farther	away	from	the
earth	 and	 the	 earthly.	 Trusting	 only	 in	 its	 small	 wings	 it	 moves	 into	 total
aloneness.	 It	goes	beyond	 the	clouds.	 It	goes	 farther	and	farther	away	from	all
shelter,	security.	It	 tries	 to	penetrate	 into	the	unknown.	And	that's	exactly	what
love	is;	love	is	an	eagle.	And	it	is	only	with	love	that	you	can	reach	the	ultimate
some	day.	Only	love	can	become	your	wings.
Let	love	be	your	path.	Let	love	be	your	religion.	There	is	no	higher	religion	than
love.
Love	is	only	for	 the	courageous.	The	coward	cannot	be	loving.	At	the	most	he
can	pretend,	but	his	 love	will	 remain	phony	because	he	 cannot	 fulfil	 the	basic
requirement	of	love	--	and	that	is	surrendering	your	ego.
Love	grows	only	when	the	ego	disappears.	The	ego	is	like	a	seed.	When	the	seed
dies	 in	 the	 soil	 then	 love	 grows	 like	 a	 sprout.	 Then	 there	 is	 great	 foliage	 and
greenery	and	branches	and	flowers	and	fruits.	Life	becomes	a	fulfilment	through
love.	The	only	barrier	is	the	hard	shell	of	the	ego.	Great	courage	is	needed	to	get
out	of	it.	It	seems	very	protective,	secure,	safe,	cosy.
Love	is	sannyas.	It	is	love	in	the	ultimate	sense	of	the	word.	It	is	love	at	its	peak.
It	is	a	love	affair	with	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
god	himself,	with	life	itself.	It	is	falling	in	love	with	existence.
Love	is	always	now.	It	never	gets	old.	It	never	ages.	It	is	always	fresh.	That's	the
beauty	of	love.
Because	it	never	grows	old,	it	never	dies.	Because	it	always	remains	fresh,	it	is
always	light,	unburdened	by	the	past,	unburdened	by	the	future.	It	 is	always	in
the	present.	That's	its	freshness.
The	 whole	 existence	 is	 fresh	 and	 young	 except	 for	 man's	 mind.	 Man's	 mind
accumulates	 junk,	 memories,	 and	 goes	 on	 accumulating.	 And	 everybody	 is
carrying	such	a	big	load.	Because	it	is	invisible	nobody	can	see	it,	but	when	you
start	understanding	 the	process	of	 the	mind,	when	you	become	a	watcher,	you
can	see	everybody	carrying	a	mountain-load.	People	are	crushed	under	the	load
but	 they	 go	 on	 carrying	 it.	 The	 load	 goes	 on	 growing	 every	 day	 and	 they	 are
being	crushed	more	and	more	every	day.	They	die	under	 its	 load.	Their	 life	 is
just	 an	 unnecessary	 conflict,	 drag,	 boredom,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they
never	allow	themselves	to	be	renewed.
The	very	process	 of	 renewing	oneself	 is	 love:	 love	 existence,	 and	don't	 say	 "I
will	 love	 tomorrow",	 because	 tomorrow	 has	 no	meaning.	 Either	 love	 or	 don't
love,	but	never	postpone.	always	think	as	if	This	is	the	last	moment,	there	may
be	no	other	moment	available.	Who	knows?	--	the	next	moment	you	may	not	be
there.	 Death	 can	 disrupt	 life	 at	 any	 moment.	 Death	 is	 always	 hanging	 like	 a
naked	sword	over	your	head,	it	can	cut	you	down	at	any	moment.	And	it	hangs
by	such	a	thing	thread	that	just	any	small	accident,	just	a	small	breeze	and	that's
enough.
Always	 remember	 that	each	moment	has	 to	be	 lived	 totally	because	 there	may
not	be	any	other	chance	to	live	again.	so	don't	say	"I	will	love	tomorrow".	Love
this	moment,	right	now	and	don't	confine	your	love.
Let	 it	 spread,	 let	 it	be	as	vast	 as	possible,	because	you	will	be	as	vast	 as	your
love	is.	If	your	love	can	be	as	big	as	the	whole,	than	you	have	become	the	whole.
You	are	what	your	love	is.
That	will	go	on	renewing	you,	rejuvenating	you,	and	that	will	go	on	helping	you
to	keep	 clean	 and	 fresh,	mirrorlike,	without	 any	dust	 collecting	on	you.	That's
what	makes	one	aware	of	that	which	is,	aware	of	God.
It	 is	 through	 loving	 existence	 that	 one	 becomes	 aware	 of	 the	 presence	 of
something	mysterious	that	surrounds	everything.
Love	is	victory,	although	in	a	very	strange	way,	because	love	is	also	surrender.
On	 the	 one	 hand	 it	 is	 surrender.	 on	 the	 other	 hand	 it	 is	 victory.	 It	 is	 the	most
paradoxical	phenomenon	in	existence.	If	you	try	to	win	you	will	lose;	if	you	are
ready	to	lose	you	are	already	victorious.
To	 learn	 this	 secret	 of	 life	 is	 of	 immense	 importance,	 because	 not	 knowing	 it
people	 go	 on	 trying	 to	 do	 the	 impossible	 and	 the	 impossible	 cannot	 happen;
hence	they	suffer.	All	 their	hopes	are	shattered	sooner	or	 later,	all	 their	dreams
prove	 to	 be	 nothing	 but	 dreams	 and	 all	 their	 desires	 bring	 only	 frustration,
failure,	 pain	 and	 misery	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	 do	 not	 know	 the
fundamental	law	of	life.
You	can	win	but	 the	condition	 to	win	 is	 to	 surrender	 in	 love.	 It	 looks	difficult
event	 to	 understand	 it,	 because	 if	 I	 want	 to	 win,	 how	 can	 I	 win	 through
surrender?	It	is	illogical,	certainly,	but	life	is	illogical,	existence	is	absurd	--	or,
you	can	call	it	mysterious.
Those	 who	 condemn	 existence,	 they	 call	 it	 absurd.	 Those	 who	 worship
existence,	they	call	it	mysterious.
But	it	is	the	same	thing.	They	are	both	saying	that	it	is	illogical.
Jesus	says:	If	you	cling	to	life	you	will	lose	it.	If	you	are	ready	to	lose	it	you	will
enter	 into	 the	kingdom	of	God,	you	will	 attain	 to	 eternal	 life.	He	 is	 indicating
this	law	of	love.
Give	it	a	try,	because	only	then	will	you	understand	what	sannyas	is.	When	you
start	feeling	the	truth	of	the	law	of	love	you	really	become	a	sannyasin.	Then	you
rejoice	 in	 the	 paradoxes.	 Then	 they	 are	 no	 more	 puzzles	 to	 be	 solved	 but
mysteries	to	be	lived.
It	is	beautiful	that	life	is	not	logical.	Otherwise	it	would	have	been	so	mundane.
It	 is	good	 that	 life	 is	not	a	problem.	Otherwise	man	 is	so	stupid	 that	he	would
have	solved	it	by	now	(laughter)....	and	then	what?
Then	there	is	only	suicide.	But	man	cannot	solve	it	because	it	is	not	a	problem	in
the	first	place.	It	is	utterly	mysterious.
The	more	you	enter	into	it,	the	more	ignorant	you	become,	not	knowledgeable.
The	more	you	know,	the	less	you	know;	the	you	come	in	contact	with	life,	 the
more	you	see	the	point	that	it	is	impossible	to	know	it,	it	is	simply	impossible	to
know	it.	But	there	is	no	need	to	know	it.	Knowledge	is	superfluous.	One	can	live
without	knowing	it.
You	 eat,	 you	 digest	 the	 food	 without	 knowing	 how	 you	 are	 doing	 it.	 You
transform	the	food	into	blood	and	bones	and	marrow	without	knowing	how	you
are	managing	 it.	So	 it	 is	 the	case	with	 life.	There	 is	no	need	 to	know,	 there	 is
great	need	to	love.	But	only	one	who	can	love	is	ready	to	surrender.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	surrender	to	be	victorious!
The	only	quality	that	man	already	possesses	which	can	be	called	divine	is	love.
Love	 is	 the	only	proof	 that	God	exists.	There	 is	no	other	proof.	So	 those	who
have	not	loved	cannot	conceive	that	God	is	possible.
Friedrich	Nietzsche	 says	 that	God	 is	 dead	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 his	 heart
never	flowed	in	love.	In	fact	he	should	have	said	that	love	is	dead.	That's	what
was	happening	inside	him:	love	was	dead.	And	because	love	is	dead	there	is	no
proof	for	God.
Sigmund	Freud	does	not	believe	in	God	because	he	does	not	believe	in	love.	He
thinks	sexuality	is	all,	man	ends	with	sex.	If	man	ends	with	sex	then	there	is	no
difference	between	man	and	animals,	then	there	is	no	humanity	really,	then	man
is	 another	 species	 of	 animal.	 Sigmund	 Freud	 takes	 away	 all	 the	 glory	 of
humanity.
And	Karl	Marx	says	that	there	is	no	God.
But	all	these	three	people	who	have	dominated	this	century	are	basically	of	the
same	 type.	 These	 three	 people	 have	 not	 known	 love.	 I	 really	 feel	 deep
compassion	 for	 them.	Even	 though	 I	 criticise	 them,	 I	 criticise	 them	with	great
compassion.	 I	 feel	 sorry	 for	 them.	 They	 were	 really	 capable	 people,	 very
intelligent	people.
Just	 one	 thing	was	 dead	 in	 their	 being,	 love	was	 dead.	And	because	 love	was
dead	 there	was	no	bridge	between	 them	and	existence.	Because	 love	was	dead
God	was	incomprehensible,	absolutely	incomprehensible,	pure	nonsense.
If	one	wants	to	seek	and	search	for	God,	truth,	then	one	has	to	revive	one's	love,
one	has	to	make	it	flow.
And	that's	my	work	here,	to	help	you	so	that	you	can	become	a	flowing	love.
Love	is	the	only	alchemy	that	brings	purity,	that	purifies	you,	that	helps	you	to
become	your	essential	self.	It	cuts	away	all	that	is	non-essential,	accidental.	Then
only	 the	 essential	 is	 left.	 The	 essential	 is	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 destroyed	 by
death,	and	the	non-essential	is	that	which	is	bound	to	be	destroyed	by	time	and
death.	That's	the	criterion	to	judge	what	is	essential	and	what	is	non-essential.
Love	 is	 a	kind	of	 fire.	 Just	 as	gold	becomes	pure	by	passing	 through	 fire,	one
becomes	pure	by	passing	 through	love.	And	purity	brings	beauty,	purity	brings
grace,	because	purity	brings	a	subtle,	divine	aura	around	you.	You	are	no	more
gross,	you	become	a	fragrance.	And	only	when	your	fragrance	is	released	do	you
know	that	God	is.	Before	all	that	else	is	argumentation;	futile,	sterile	speculation.
When	you	have	come	to	know	what	grace	is	then	you	know	what	God	is.	Grace
is	the	only	proof	that	God	has	happened	to	you.	But	one	has	to	pass	through	the
fire	of	 love.	Those	who	avoid	 love,	 they	are	avoiding	God.	Those	who	escape
from	love	will	never	know	what	god	is.
Love	 is	 synonymous	with	God.	One	should	 love	 love	 itself,	only	 then	can	one
know	what	God	is.
Otherwise	 one	 can	 go	 on	 thinking	 about	 God,	 but	 thinking	 is	 not	 knowing.
Knowing	is	closer	to	feeling,	far	closer	to	the	heart	than	to	the	head,	far	closer	to
love	 than	 to	 logic.	 Knowing	 is	 an	 experience	 --	 and	 love	 is	 the	 greatest
experience	man	is	capable	of.	One	should	begin	with	love.
My	 emphasis	 is	 that	 loving	 people	 is	 secondary,	 loving	 love	 is	 primary.	 Of
course	you	will	love	people	and	you	will	love	trees	and	you	will	love	stars	and
you	will	love	animals.	That	is	a	by-product,	a	by-product	of	being	in	love	with
love.	 Just	as	 they	say	"Art	 for	art's	 sake,	 "	 I	 say	"Love	 for	 love's	 sake."	When
you	 love	 love	 itself	 your	 love	 cannot	 be	 contaminated	 and	 you	 can	 love	may
people,	in	many	ways.	But	when	you	forget	love	and	you	become	obsessed	with
persons	or	things,	then	your	love	is	contaminated.	It	becomes	jealous,	it	becomes
possessive,	it	becomes	afraid.	It	becomes	all	kinds	of	things	except	love.
To	keep	one's	love	pure,	unpolluted,	is	the	path	of	sannyas.	Love	as	many	people
as	much	as	you	can,	but	 remember	always	 that	your	devotion	 is	 towards	 love,
not	towards	particular	people.	If	you	become	attached	you	miss	the	whole	point
and	love	disappears.
Remain	unattached	and	 flowing.	That	 is	what	 I	call	being	married	 to	 love;	not
being	married	 to	somebody	but	 to	 the	experience	of	 love	 itself.	You	can	call	 it
being	married	to	God	--	it	is	the	same.
Sannyas	is	a	love	affair,	a	love	affair	with	love	itself.
The	greatest	 thing	 in	 life	and	 the	highest	 too	 is	 love.	 If	one	becomes	 love	one
becomes	God.	The	condition	to	become	love	is	only	one,	and	that	is	to	drop	the
ego.	Ego	is	a	false	entity.	It	does	not	exist.	It	exists	only	because	we	believe	in	it.
If	we	withdraw	our	belief	it	evaporates,	it	disappears.
So	withdraw	your	belief	in	the	ego,	in	the	separate	existence	of	yourself.	We	are
not	separate,	we	are	all	one.	Man	is	not	an	island,	nobody	is.	we	are	all	part	of	a
vast,	 infinite	continent.	We	are	small	waves	 in	a	vast	ocean.	And	to	feel	 that	 'I
am	part	of	the	vastness	of	existence,'	brings	great	joy.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Drop	the	ego.	Start	feeling	more	and	more	in	tune	at	with	the	whole,	not	separate
from	it.	And	that	will	become	an	explosion	of	love	in	you.	The	moment	the	ego
is	dropped,	love	explodes.	It	is	the	ego	that	hinders	love	like	a	rock	hindering	a
small	stream.	Remove	the	rock	and	the	stream	starts	flowing.
Sannyas	means	 dropping	 the	 ego	 and	moving	more	 and	more	 into	 the	whole.
And	 with	 that	 all	 worries	 disappear	 on	 their	 own	 accord.	 When	 you	 are	 not
separate	 there	 is	no	question	of	worrying.	Worrying	about	 the	future,	worrying
about	death	--	if	you	are	not	separate	you	cannot	die.	You	were	here	before	your
birth	and	you	will	be	here	after	your	death.	Nobody	ever	dies.	Death	 is	only	a
shadow	of	the	ego.	Ego	is	false,	so	is	death.	Both	are	false	entities,	but	we	live
dominated	by	these	two	entities,	ego	and	death.
Sannyas	means	 getting	 rid	 of	 both	 of	 them	 in	 one	 single	 stroke,	 in	 one	 single
blow.	 Then	 life	 is	 a	 dance,	 then	 each	 moment	 is	 so	 precious,	 so	 exquisitely
beautiful.	This	very	moment	is	incomparably	beautiful	--
the	silence,	the	frogs,	the	trees...	This	is	what	God	is,	this	totality.
So	live,	not	as	a	separate	entity	from	now	onwards,	but	as	part	of	the	whole.	That
is	going	to	be	your	work	upon	yourself.
Love	is	the	most	immeasurable	experience	of	life.	It	is	absolutely	unfathomable.
There	 is	 no	 bottom	 to	 it.	 You	 can	 go	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 and	 deeper,	 and	 the
mystery	 deepens	 more	 and	 more.	 You	 cannot	 de-mystify	 it.	 Love	 cannot	 be
explained	away,	it	cannot	be	defined	either.	It	is	so	vast,	so	infinite,	that	no	word
is	capable	of	containing	it.	all	definitions	fall	short.
If	you	allow	love	to	happen	to	you,	you	are	allowing	the	mysterious	to	happen	to
you.	And	it	is	through	this	mysteriousness	that	one	becomes	connected	to	God.
Love	is	 the	beginning	of	God,	 it	 is	entering	into	his	 territory.	That's	why	Jesus
says	that	God	is	love.	It's	absolutely	true.
For	man,	God	is	far	away,	just	a	word.	It	means	nothing.	We	have	to	approach
God	 through	 something	 more	 concrete,	 something	 more	 tangible,	 something
more	human.	That's	what	love	is.	It	is	god	manifested.
God	 is	 love	 in	 its	 unmanifest	 state.	 Love	 is	 the	 closest	 possibility	 of	 reaching
towards	God,	the	nearest	door.
So	never	go	 into	 the	definitions,	don't	bothered	about	 the	philosophies	of	 love,
experience	 it.	 There	 is	 no	 other	way	 to	 know	 it	 except	 existential	 experience.
Unless	you	experience	it,	you	don't	know	it.	And	there	is	no	need	to	know	about
it	 without	 experiencing	 it.	 That's	 what	 people	 go	 on	 doing:	 they	 accumulate
information	about	love,	they	become	very	knowledgeable,	but	they	are	deceived.
Their	own	knowledge	becomes	a	barrier	to	experiencing	it.
No	knowledge	 is	of	 any	help,	 it	 is	 always	a	barrier.	 If	you	want	 to	know	 love
unlearn	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 learnt	 about	 it.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 experience	 truth
forget	all	the	theories	that	have	been	taught	to	you.	If	you	want	to	meet	God	then
beware	of	all	the	priests	and	all	the	theologians.
Existence	needs	no	mediators.	You	are	fully	capable	of	coming	directly	to	it.	You
have	the	intrinsic	capacity	to	know,	to	see,	to	feel,	to	be.
Become	a	friend	to	all	that	is	--	to	human	beings,	to	animals,	to	trees,	to	rocks.
Create	 the	 quality	 of	 friendliness.	 Don't	 make	 any	 distinctions.	 Let	 it	 flow	 to
everyone	irrespective	of	caste	and	creed	and	nation.
Forget	 all	 distinctions	 and	 then	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 consciousness	 will	 start
becoming	universal.
Friendship	is	a	sure	step	in	dropping	the	ego	and	becoming	egoless.	Ego	exists
by	 creating	 enemies,	 because	 ego	 exists	 through	 fight.	 The	 moment	 all	 fight
disappears	from	your	mind	ego	has	no	more	support.
And	with	that	all	you	boundaries	disappear,	you	become	one	with	the	universe.
Friendship	is	the	pure	essence	of	love.
Love	is	godly.	Hate	is	evil.	Love	is	divine	and	people	live	in	hatred.	Even	when
they	think	that	they	love	it	is	not	love,	it	is	something	else.
Adolf	Hitler	in	his	autobiography	MEIN	KAMPF	says	that	a	country	can	remain
united	 only	 if	 there	 are	 enemies	 on	 the	 outside,	 because	 people	 feel	 united	 if
there	 is	 a	 common	 enemy.	 If	 they	 can	 hate	 somebody	 together	 they	 feel	 great
love	 for	 each	other.	 If	 the	 common	enemy	 is	 there	 then	 they	 are	very	 friendly
with	each	other.	If	there	is	no	common	enemy	they	hate	each	other.
This	is	a	very	fundamental	truth.	Of	course	he	exploited	it	in	his	own	ways.	He
was	not	concerned	with	the	truth,	he	was	concerned	with	how	to	make	it	a	base
for	his	exploitation.	But	this	is	the	experience	of	the	centuries.
In	 India,	 before	 freedom	 came,	 Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 were	 fighting
continuously.	 So	 it	 was	 decided	 to	 divide	 the	 country	 in	 two;	 hence	 Pakistan
came	 into	 existence,	 and	 it	was	 thought	 that	 now	 there	would	 be	 no	 problem:
Mohammedans	would	be	 in	Pakistan,	Hindus	would	be	 in	Hindustan	and	 there
would	be	no	problem.	But	Hindus	started	fighting	amongst	themselves.	Then	the
South	started	fighting	against	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
North	 and	 the	Maharastrians	 started	 fighting	 against	 the	Gujaratis,	 and	Hindi-
speaking	people	started	fighting	against	the	non-Hindi-speaking	people.
It	seems	that	we	are	united	only	through	hate,	never	through	love.	We	call	it	love
--	deep	down	is	hate.
That's	why	everybody	thinks	that	he	loves	buth	the	world	is	so	loveless.	It	can't
be	more	loveless	than	it	is,	it	can't	fall	any	further.
Sannyas	means	becoming	aware	of	this	calamity,	that	we	have	forgotten	how	to
love.	 Even	 hate	 is	 labelled	 love,	 and	 we	 believe	 in	 the	 labels.	 We	 are	 great
believers	 in	 labels,	 in	words,	 in	 slogans,	 and	we	never	 look	 inside,	 behind	 the
label	into	reality.
Husbands	and	wives	go	on	pretending	 that	 they	 love	each	other	and	 they	hate,
from	 their	 very	 guts	 they	hate	 each	 other.	 Parents	 go	 on	 saying	 that	 they	 love
their	children,	and	it	is	not	true.	They	love	them	only	if	the	children	are	obedient,
they	love	them	only	if	the	children	are	fulfilling	their	ambitions,	their	egos.
Otherwise	the	whole	of	their	love	disappears.	And	children	think	they	love	their
parents,	 that	 is	 nonsense.	 It	 is	 just	 a	 question	 of	 survival,	 they	 can't	 survive
without	the	parents.	so	they	moment	They	are	ready	to	stand	on	their	own	they
forget	all	about	the	parents.	They	don't	care	a	bit.
The	reality	is	ugly	but	it	can	be	transformed	if	we	see	it.	First	the	wound	has	to
be	seen,	only	then	can	it	be	cured	and	healed.
Love	has	to	become	the	only	religion	on	earth.	Hate	is	the	only	sin,	the	original
sin,	and	love	is	the	only	ladder	to	God.
Love	is	the	only	truth.	Everything	else	is	theorising,	speculation,	philosophising.
Love	 is	 existential	 experience.	 You	 cannot	 think	 about	 love.	 what	 is	 there	 to
think	 about	 love?	 You	 can	 love	 but	 you	 cannot	 think	 about	 love.	 That	 is	 the
beauty	of	it,	that	it	takes	you	into	reality	immediately.	You	can	think	about	God.
In	fact	how	will	you	live	God?	You	can	think	about	a	thousand	and	one	things
but	they	are	all	things	which	cannot	be	lived.	and	if	a	thing	cannot	be	lived	it	is
not	worth	paying	any	attention	to	it.
Love	cannot	be	thought	about,	it	can	only	be	lived;	hence	it	is	a	door	to	God,	to
reality.	Lovers	have	known	god,	not	philosophers.	Poets	sometimes	come	closer
to	knowing	God	than	thinkers	because	poetry	is	closer	to	love	than	anything	else.
Musicians	come	very	close,	even	closer	than	poets,	because	music	is	so	close	to
love	that	there	is	only	a	difference	of	one	step	more	and	you	will	be	in	the	ocean
of	 love.	 But	 that	 one	 step	 has	 to	 be	 taken.	 Many	 musicians	 remain	 just
musicians,	technicians.	they	know	the	whole	art	but	they	have	not	yet	taken	the
jump	into	the	unknown.	They	have	not	yet	loved	existence,	but	they	come	very
close;	closer	than	scientists,	closer	than	philosophers,	closer	than	other	experts.
Get	deeper	into	poetry	so	that	you	can	have	a	few	glimpses	of	love.	Get	deeper
into	music	 so	 that	you	can	come	very	close	 to	 the	ocean	of	 love.	Dance!	And
when	dancing,	abandon	yourself	totally	to	it.	Dance	so	deeply	that	you	disappear
in	 the	 dance.	 When	 in	 the	 dance	 the	 dancer	 disappears	 you	 will	 have	 some
experience	of	love.	And	then	you	can	use	that	experience	as	a	foundation	stone.
And	on	that	foundation	you	can	build	the	whole	temple	of	love.
The	 life	of	 a	 sannyasin	has	 to	be	 a	 temple	of	 love.	When	you	have	 raised	 the
whole	temple,	truth	comes	in	to	reside	of	its	own	accord.	You	become	love	and
you	become	the	host,	and	truth	becomes	the	guest.	But	unless	you	are	love	truth
cannot	enter	you.
Life	is	dark	without	love.	It	is	hell	without	love.	It	is	a	nightmare	without	love.
Bring	 love	 into	 your	 life	 and	 the	 darkness	 disappears	 and	 the	 nightmares	 turn
into	beautiful,	creative	acts.	And	hell	is	transformed	into	heaven.
Hell	 and	 heaven	 are	 not	 two	 different	 things.	Hell	 is	 the	 same	 life	 as	 heaven,
with	only	one	difference:	life	plus	love	is	heaven,	life	minus	love	is	hell.
So	 love	 more	 and	 more,	 love	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 loving,	 without	 asking	 for
anything	 in	 return.	 Love	 without	 any	 motive,	 because	 the	 moment	 a	 motive
enters	love	is	destroyed,	crippled,	paralysed.	The	moment	you	ask	for	something
in	return	it	is	bargaining.	It	is	no	more	love,	it	is	business.
Love	can	only	be	given	as	a	gift.	Of	course	much	comes	back,	a	thousandfold,
but	that	is	another	thing.
It	comes	on	its	own	accord,	you	need	not	ask	for	it.	Ask	and	it	will	never	come.
That	 fundamental	 law	has	 to	be	 remembered.	 If	you	ask	anything	 in	 return	 for
your	love	nothing	will	come.	If	you	don't	ask	you	will	be	showered	with	love.
Life	loves	not	beggars	but	emperors.
John	 is	 one	 of	 the	 twelve	 disciples	 of	 Jesus,	 and	 in	 the	New	Testament	 he	 is
called	 the	most	 beloved	 disciple.	 So	 John	 has	 become	 symbolic	 of	 the	 of	 the
beloved	disciple.	Hence	so	many	people	around	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
world	have	the	name	John.	In	different	languages	maybe	it	is	a	little	different;	in
Dutch	Jan,	and	in	some	other	 languages	a	 little	different,	but	John	seems	to	be
one	of	 the	most	common	names,	for	 the	simple	reason	that	 it	reminds	one	of	a
tremendous	love	affair	between	John	the	disciple	and	Jesus	the	master.	It	has	to
be	remembered.
It	can	transpire	again	between	me	and	you,	and	then	your	name	will	be	fulfilled.
and	 it	 is	 the	most	blissful	 relationship	possible	because	 it	 is	 love	at	 its	highest
peak....	and	not	only	love	but	understanding	too.
Love	alone	brings	both	ecstasy	and	agony.	Love	plus	understanding	means	only
ecstasy,	no	agony.
Agony	comes	 through	 ignorant	 love.	One	wants	 to	do	good,	one	 intends	 to	do
good,	but	one	cannot	because	one	is	so	unconscious,	so	ignorant,	that	one	does
not	 really	 know	what	 is	 good.	 So	 in	 trying	 to	 do	 good	 one	 creates	 a	mess.	 In
being	helpful	one	becomes	harmful.
When	love	is	with	understanding	then	there	is	no	darkness	in	it.	It	is	pure	light.
Ordinary	love	is	ignorant	love,	and	the	love	that	exists	between	the	master	and
the	disciple	is	love	full	of	understanding.	It	is	love	out	of	understanding.
In	ordinary	love	we	hope	that	understanding	will	grow	through	love.	Between	a
master	and	a	disciple	understanding	is	the	first	thing	and	love	grows	out	of	it.	As
you	 understand	 your	master	more	 and	more,	 you	 come	 closer	 and	 closer,	 you
imbibe	his	spirit.	The	more	understanding	happens	between	you	and	the	master,
the	more	love	arises.	And	love	and	understanding	can	become	two	wings.	They
can	take	you	to	the	other	shore.
Yashodhara	is	the	name	of	Gautam	Buddha's	wife.	A	very	rare	woman	she	was.
Buddha	renounced	her.
Without	 telling	her	he	escaped	 into	 the	 forest.	For	 twelve	years	 she	waited	 for
him.	 Never	 a	 single	 complaint	 was	 heard	 from	 her.	 She	 never	 said,	 never
grumbled,	that	her	husband	had	deceived	her,	betrayed	her,	or	anything.	On	the
contrary	she	would	always	say	 'He	has	gone	 to	seek	and	search	for	 truth	and	I
know	that	whenever	he	finds	it,	he	will	come	to	share	it	with	me.	That	much	is
certain.'
Her	trust	and	love	were	so	infinite.	It	was	difficult,	it	is	really	difficult	to	wait	for
twelve	 years.	 No	 message	 was	 received,	 nothing	 was	 known	 about	 his
whereabouts.	There	were	rumours,	gossip,	that	he	had	become	an	ascetic,	that	he
was	doing	this	and	that	he	was	doing	that.	But	nothing	concrete,	nothing	reliable.
But	she	never	wavered.
After	 twelve	years	Buddha	 came	back.	When	he	became	enlightened,	 the	 first
thing	he	did	was	to	ask	his	disciples	"Come	with	me.	I	have	to	go	to	my	wife.	I
owe	it	to	her.	She	has	waited	too	long,	and	she	has	trusted.'
When	 Buddha	 came,	 she	 only	 said	 one	 thing.	 She	 said	 'I	 have	 only	 one
complaint	to	make	to	you:	I	could	not	have	said	it	to	anybody	else,	I	can	only	say
it	to	you.	Why	didn't	you	ask	me?	Could	you	not	trust	me?	I	would	have	allowed
you	 to	go.	And	 if	you	had	allowed	me	I	may	have	come	with	you.	 If	 it	would
have	been	difficult	to	take	me	with	you,	that	would	have	been	okay,	but	at	least
you	should	have	told	me.
The	only	thing	that	hurts	me	is	that	you	could	not	believe	in	me,	that	you	could
not	trust	me	totally.'
It	 is	 said	 that	Buddha	had	no	answer	 for	 it.	 It	was	 true,	 the	woman	was	 right.
Buddha	said	'Forgive	me	and	forget	the	past.	Now	I	have	attained	what	I	went	to
attain	 and	 I	 have	 come	 to	 share	 it	 with	 you.	 Be	 initiated	 and	 become	 a
sannyasin.'
And	she	became	a	sannyasin	immediately...	not	even	a	moment's	hesitation.	She
didn't	say	'I	will	think	it	over.'	There	was	no	question.	A	Buddha	said	'Become	a
sannyasin.'	She	became	a	sannyasin.
And	 then	 she	 remains	 like	 an	 ordinary	 sannyasins	 amongst	 thousands	 of
sannyasins.	 She	 loses	 all	 her	 claims	 that	 she	 is	 somehow	 special.	 Nothing	 is
heard	about	her	She	goes	and	mixes	in	the	crowd	of	sannyasins.	She	becomes	an
absolute	 nonentity.	 And	 Buddha's	 respect	 for	 her	 goes	 on	 growing.	 One	 he
mentions	 her	 again	 saying	 'This	woman	 is	 rare.	 I	was	 a	 little	 afraid	 that	 even
though	she	became	a	sannysin	she	would	try	to	say	that	she	is	special,	that	she
has	been	my	wife.	But	she	has	simply	disappeared,	melted.
No	claim	on	Buddha,	no	claim	for	any	special	attention.'
Buddha	 said	 'Her	 name	 is	 right,	 she	 has	 proved	 it.	 Yashodhara	 means	 the
glorious	one.	she	is	a	glorious	woman.'
Love	has	not	 to	be	 learned.	 It	 is	our	very	nature,	we	are	born	with	 it.	 It	 is	not
something	 for	which	we	 need	 any	 education.	 It	 is	 something	which	 is	 already
there	 but	 hindered	 by	many	 things.	We	have	 only	 to	 remove	 those	 hindrances
and	 love	 starts	 flowing.	And	when	 love	 starts	 flowing	you	 start	moving	 into	a
totally	new	dimension.	That	dimension	is	God.	and	when	you	know	how	much
has	been	given.	Inestimable,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
immeasurable	is	this	gift.
Love	is	the	most	precious	of	all	his	gifts	--	but	it	dies.	We	never	give	it	a	chance
to	sprout,	we	never	create	 the	right	space	for	 it	 to	grow.	We	never	become	the
spring	so	that	it	can	flower	and	bloom.
That's	what	sannyas	is:	creating	a	right	space,	the	right	soil	for	love	to	grow,	for
love	 to	expand.	As	your	 love	becomes	bigger,	you	become	bigger.	When	your
love	 is	 perfect	 you	 are	 perfect.	 There	 is	 no	 other	way	 to	 be	 perfect.	Only	 the
perfection	of	love	can	bring	perfection	to	your	being.
There	 are	 two	ways	 to	 reach	God:	 one	 is	meditation,	 the	 other	 is	 love.	A	 few
people	reach	through	meditation,	a	few	people	reach	through	love.	Both	are	valid
ways	and	both	reach	the	same	experience.
When	the	meditator	reaches	the	ultimate	peak	he	suddenly	finds	love	arising	in
his	 being,	 and	 when	 the	 lover	 reaches	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 he	 finds	 meditation
happening	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	On	 the	way	 they	 are	 different,	 at	 the	 peak	 they
become	one.
The	 path	 of	 meditation	 is	 arduous,	 it	 demands	 a	 little	 superhuman	 effort.	 It
passes	through	deserts;	it	passes	through	rocky	deserts	where	nothing	grows.
The	path	of	love	is	easier,	natural,	simple	--	far	more	poetic	too,	far	more	human
too.	It	passes	through	a	different	territory,	full	of	greenery,	with	birds	singing	and
flowers	blooming,	waterfalls	and	butterflies.	 It	passes	 through	a	beautiful	 land.
On	the	path	of	love	only	surrender	is	needed,	nothing	else;	just	a	let-go,	a	deep
relaxation.	One	stops	pushing	the	river	and	starts	flowing	with	the	river.	And	the
river	is	already	going	to	the	ocean;	it	will	take	you,	it	will	carry	you.
If	one	is	incapable	of	love,	then	only	do	I	suggest	that	one	move	through	the	path
of	meditation.
Otherwise,	why	bother	going	through	a	desert	land	when	you	could	have	passed
through	gardens	and	beautiful	forest?
The	first	preference	is	love.	But	if	somehow	love	has	been	so	destroyed	by	your
upbringing,	has	been	so	poisoned	that	 the	very	word	frightens	you,	scares	you,
then	I	suggest	you	go	through	the	path	of	mediation.
Many	 more	 people	 reach	 through	 the	 path	 of	 love;	 almost	 ninety	 percent.	 of
people	will	find	it	easier	to	move	through	love.	And	my	feeling	about	you	is	that
love	will	be	easier	for	you.
Become	a	lover	of	existence.
Let	sannyas	be	a	love	affair	with	the	cosmos!
If	You	Choose	To	Be	With	Me,	You	Must	Risk	Finding	Yourself	Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:
10	February	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8002105
ShortTitle:	WITHME10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	copy-typed.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
In	my	vision	virtue	has	nothing	to	do	with	morality.	A	virtuous	man	is	beyond
the	moral	and	immoral.	A	virtuous	man	is	not	calculative.	He	acts	spontaneously,
not	out	of	certain	principles.	The	moral	man	acts	out	of	certain	principles	given
by	tradition,	by	scriptures,	given	by	others.	The	moral	man	is	an	imitator,	he	is
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
pseudo.	He	is	trying	hard	to	be	a	saint.	But	you	can	never	be	a	saint	by	trying	too
hard,	because	the	very	strain	creates	tension	in	your	being.	And	a	tense	saint	is
not	a	saint	at	all.
Relaxation,	 a	 total	 let-go,	 is	 a	 must.	 the	 real	 saint	 does	 not	 strive	 to	 be
something,	he	simply	relaxes,	he	accepts	himself,	whatsoever	he	is.	He	rejoices
in	it,	and	in	that	very	rejoicing	he	becomes	a	saint.
Virtue	means	spontaneity.	We	have	been	told	what	to	do	and	what	not	to	do,	we
have	not	been	told	how	to	remain	natural.	A	thousand	and	one	things	have	been
imposed	upon	us.
My	work	here	 is	 to	help	you	 to	 find	your	nature,	 that	which	you	brought	with
you	into	the	world.	All	that	has	been	given	by	others	has	to	be	put	aside.	Only
that	which	you	brought	with	you	at	birth	has	to	be	helped,	nourished,	taken	care
of,	so	that	you	can	be	spontaneous	again	like	a	child,	so	that	you	can	act	out	of
the	moment.	That	is	true	responsibility:	the	capacity	to	respond	to	the	moment,
not	according	to	some	set	formula,	not	according	to	some	ready-made	ideology.
It	is	the	way	of	the	stupid	person	to	act	out	of	ready-made	ideologies.
The	wise	person	acts	out	of	awareness.	He	is	fully	alert	in	the	moment,	he	makes
himself	 available	 to	 the	moment,	 he	 responds	 to	 the	moment.	 And	 something
transpires	between	him	and	existence	--	and	that	is	beautiful,	that	is	virtue.
Love	is	the	message	of	god.	We	all	bring	the	message	to	the	world	but	we	forget
it	on	the	way.	The	way	is	long,	falling	and	falling	and	falling	from	the	heavenly
abode	 and	 reaching	 the	 earth	 --	 it	 is	 such	 a	 long	 journey.	 Then	 one	 forgets
everything.	 One	 forgets	 why	 one	 has	 come	 at	 all,	 from	 where.	 what	 is	 one's
purpose	in	life?	Everything	becomes	a	confusion	and	a	chaos.
The	 function	of	 the	master	 is	 to	 remind	you	 that	 you	have	 a	purpose	 to	 fulfil.
Everybody	 comes	with	 a	 destiny,	 everybody	 comes	 to	 attain	 to	 some	meaning
and	to	contribute	some	beauty	to	the	world.
Love	is	the	most	essential	message	that	everybody	brings	in	his	own	way.	It	has
to	be	delivered	 in	different	ways.	 somebody	will	deliver	 it	 through	music,	 and
somebody	through	a	dance,	and	somebody	through	singing,	and	so	on,	so	forth.
But	 the	essential	message	 is	 love,	because	 love	 is	 the	bridge	between	god	and
man.	 It	 is	 through	moving	more	and	more	 into	 love	 that	one	comes	closer	and
closer	to	god.	When	one	has	become	love	itself	one	has	come	back	home.
Man	can	only	have	any	 contact	with	god	 through	meditation,	 there	 is	no	other
way,	 because	 it	 is	 only	 in	 meditation	 that	 you	 melt,	 that	 you	 merge	 into	 the
whole.	And	god	is	not	a	person.	God	simply	symbolises	the	whole,	the	totality,
the	totality	of	all:	the	stars,	the	sun,	the	moon,	the	people,	the	animals,	the	trees,
the	earth,	and	all	 that	 is.	God	is	only	a	symbol,	a	very	loving	symbol	and	very
significant	too.	But	it	is	not	a	person,	it	is	only	a	presence.	When	you	are	silent,
in	deep	meditation,	you	start	feeling	a	presence	surrounding	you	and	surrounding
the	trees	and	the	mountains	and	the	stars	and	the	people...	a	subtle	aura	of	light,	a
subtle	aura	of	aliveness.	The	whole	existence	is	bubbling	with	life,	radiating	joy.
It	is	a	continuum	of	celebration.	It	is	a	dance	that	never	begins	and	never	ends,	a
song	that	goes	on	and	on	and	on.
The	moment	you	start	feeling	it,	there	is	nothing	else	to	do	but	to	be	grateful,	to
bow	 down	 to	 the	 infinity	 of	 existence,	 to	 the	mystery	 of	 existence	 and	 to	 the
great	gift	that	it	has	given	to	you.	That	you	are	--
this	 is	 the	gift,	 the	most	precious	gift.	That	you	are	alive,	 that	you	can	see	 the
stars	 and	 the	 sun	 and	 the	moon,	 that	 you	 can	 hear	music,	 that	 you	 can	 touch
people	and	feel	the	warmth,	that	you	can	love	and	be	loved....
Life	 is	 such	 a	 great	 opportunity	 but	 we	 are	 so	 ungrateful.	 Our	 ungratefulness
arises	out	of	a	certain	state.
That	state	is	what	is	known	as	mind.
Mind	 is	 ungrateful,	 ungenerous.	 It	 is	 very	 reluctant	 to	 say	 yes	 to	 anything,	 to
give	thanks	for	anything.	It	lives	on	the	negative.	It	is	very	efficient	at	saying	no,
it	 is	 very	 efficient	 at	 condemning,	 complaining,	 but	 it	 cannot	 praise.	 It	 is
absolutely	impotent	as	far	as	praise	is	concerned.
Praise	 arises	 in	 you	 only	 when	 you	 have	 put	 the	 mind	 aside	 and	 you	 start
functioning	from	the	heart.
That	 is	meditation.	Moving	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart	 is	meditation.	 and	 then
god	is	felt,	the	presence	becomes	almost	tangible.	And	one	cannot	avoid	it,	one
has	to	consecrate	oneself	to	that	presence,	one	has	to	surrender	to	that	presence,
one	has	to	be	overwhelmed,	possessed,	taken	away.
Meditation	needs	great	work.	It	 is	arduous,	 it	 is	an	uphill	 task.	To	remain	non-
meditative	is	easy	in	a	way.	You	have	not	to	do	anything	about	it,	you	are	already
non-meditative,	 everybody	 is	 born	 non-meditative.	 But	 to	 become	 meditative
really	 needs	 great	 courage,	 great	 determination,	 great	 patience,	 because	 to	 go
beyond	the	mind	is	the	most	complicated	phenomenon.	We	don't	know	anything
except	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
mind.	Even	when	we	think	about	going	beyond	it,	it	is	the	mind	that	is	thinking.
Even	when	we	 try	 to	 go	 beyond	 it,	 it	 is	 the	mind	 that	 is	 trying	 to	 go	 beyond
itself.	and	how	can	the	mind	go	beyond	itself	--	that	is	the	complexity.	It	is	like
pulling	 yourself	 up	 by	 your	 shoestrings.	 You	 cannot	 pull	 yourself	 up	 by	 your
shoestrings.
But	 there	 are	 methods,	 devices,	 which	 can	 be	 of	 immense	 help.	 They	 are	 all
indirect.	 Meditation	 cannot	 be	 forced.	 anything	 forced	 will	 be	 nothing	 but	 a
product	 of	 the	 mind.	 Mind	 is	 very	 coercive.	 Mind	 is	 nazi,	 it	 is	 fascist,	 it	 is
violent.	So	meditation	can	come	only	when	you	slip	out	of	the	mind	without	any
coercion,	naturally,	spontaneously.
An	 the	 device,	 the	 greatest	 device	 ever	 used	 is	 witnessing.	 Just	 watch	 your
thoughts.	Whenever	 you	 have	 time	 just	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	 see	 thoughts	 and
desires	and	memories	moving	on	the	screen	of	the	mind.	Be	totally	unconcerned.
Don't	 judge	 that	 this	 is	 right	 and	 that	 is	wrong.	 If	you	 judge	you	have	already
jumped	in.	If	you	say	'This	is	right,'	you	have	already	chosen	something,	and	the
moment	you	choose	you	become	identified	with	it,	you	have	become	attached	to
it.	You	would	not	like	it	to	go,	you	would	like	to	keep	it	for	yourself.	And	when
you	say	that	something	is	bad	you	are	pushing	it	away,	you	are	avoiding	it,	you
don't	want	it	any	more.	You	don't	want	it	even	to	be	there	on	the	screen;	hence
you	 have	 started	 fighting,	 struggling,	 and	 you	 have	 forgotten	witnessing	 in	 all
this.
Just	to	be	a	witness:	one	sits	on	the	bank	of	a	river	and	watches	the	river	flow	by.
There	is	nothing	to	judge,	nothing	really	to	say,	but	only	to	see.
And	 if	one	 is	patient	enough,	slowly	slowly	 the	 traffic	becomes	 thin.	Less	and
less	do	thoughts	come	on	the	screen	and	sometimes	for	moments	there	is	nothing
on	the	screen	and	you	are	facing	an	empty	screen.
Those	are	the	most	precious	moments	of	life,	those	intervals	when	thoughts	are
not	there,	you	are	simply	there.	The	seer	is	there	with	nothing	to	see.
Those	are	the	moments	of	purity,	innocence,	those	are	the	moments	which	can	be
called	divine.	They	are	no	more	human.	You	have	transcended	humanity	in	those
moments.	Slowly	slowly	those	moments	become	bigger	and	bigger,	and	one	day
it	becomes	such	a	simple	process	that	whenever	you	want	to	you	can	go	into	that
interval,	into	that	thoughtlessness.
Fully	aware	yet	thoughtless	--	that	is	meditation.	And	that	is	the	only	thing	that
can	 liberate	 you	 from	 all	 kinds	 of	 bondages,	 that	 can	 bring	 peace	 to	 you,	 and
bliss	and	god	and	truth.
Grace	is	never	human,	it	is	always	divine.	It	is	the	beyond	penetrating	the	gross
planes	 of	 existence.	 It	 is	 matter	 penetrated	 by	 spirit.	 When	 matter	 becomes
penetrated	by	the	spirit	it	becomes	luminous.	That	luminosity	is	grace,	that	aura
is	grace.	Grace	belongs	to	the	beyond,	to	the	eternal.
The	mind	lives	in	time,	in	the	temporal.	The	mind	knows	nothing	of	grace.	It	is
ugly	to	the	very	core,	it	is	mean,	it	can't	be	otherwise.	a	mind	generous?	--	that	is
an	impossibility.	A	mind	gracious?	--	that	is	no	possible	in	the	nature	of	things.
When	the	mind	gives	space	for	the	beyond	to	penetrate,	when	a	ray	comes	from
the	sun,	from	the	very	source	of	light	and	stirs	your	heart	and	stirs	your	dormant
energies	into	dynamic	forces,	grace	arises.	You	become	utterly	beautiful.	It	is	a
beauty	that	is	not	of	the	earth,	a	beauty	that	belongs	to	heaven	--	the	beauty	of
paradise.
Earthly	beauty	 is	 a	very	momentary	phenomenon:	one	day	 it	 is	 there,	 the	next
day	gone.	It	is	a	soap	bubble.	it	looks	beautiful	in	the	sunrays,	and	if	the	sunrays
are	penetrating	the	soap	bubble	it	can	have	a	little	rainbow	around	it,	it	can	look
very	colourful.	But	a	soap	bubble	is	a	soap	bubble	after	all,	and	soon	it	will	be
gone.	You	can't	catch	hold	of	it.	So	is	the	case	with	physical	beauty.
Grace	is	divine	beauty.	Once	achieved	it	 is	yours	forever,	 it	abides,	 it	becomes
your	very	nature.
It	 is	only	 through	meditation	 that	one	becomes	graceful,	 there	 is	no	other	way,
because	 meditation	 is	 the	 only	 way	 through	 which	 we	 can	 transcend	 mind,
through	which	we	 can	 put	 the	mind	 aside.	 it	 is	 the	 strategy,	 the	 technique,	 of
putting	the	mind	aside,	of	 turning	the	mind	off.	Once	you	have	learned	how	to
turn	 the	mind	 off,	 something	 of	 immense	 splendour	 starts	 descending	 on	 you
from	all	directions.	You	become	suffused	with	god.	That's	grace.
Meditation	means	become	aware	that	'I	am	not	the	mind.'	We	are	identified	with
the	mind,	we	don't	think	of	ourselves	as	separate	from	it.	We	are	separate,	but	we
are	so	close	to	the	mind	that	slowly	slowly	we	forget	the	separation	and	we	start
functioning	as	if	we	are	minds.	That	creates	suffering,	because	nothing	happens
to	us,	everything	happens	to	the	mind.	Happiness,	unhappiness,	success,	failure,
birth,	death	--
everything	happens	 to	 the	mind,	nothing	happens	 to	us.	We	are	always	beyond
happening.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	 when	 we	 become	 identified	 with	 the	 mind,	 if	 there	 is	 success	 we	 are	 too
excited.	If	 there	 is	failure	we	are	so	down.	If	death	 is	coming	closer	we	are	so
frightened,	so	miserable.	If	suddenly	money	arrives	unexpectedly	there	is	great
euphoria.	 But	 all	 these	 things	 are	 happening	 to	 the	mind	 and	 you	 are	 getting
affected	unnecessarily.
Meditation	means	creating	a	distance	between	you	and	the	mind	so	that	you	are
no	more	affected	by	it.
things	will	go	on	happening	but	you	will	remain	simply	a	watcher.	And	to	be	just
a	watcher	 is	a	great	freedom.	To	be	just	a	watcher	and	nothing	else	makes	one
enlightened.	When	 the	watching	 has	 settled	 so	 deeply	 that	 nothing	 disturbs	 it,
nothing	 distracts	 you	 from	 it,	 then	 you	 have	 achieved	 that	 which	 is	 worth
achieving.	You	are	victorious,	you	have	become	a	master	of	yourself.
Then	life	has	a	 totally	different	beauty,	a	 totally	different	grace.	It	has	a	divine
aura	 around	 it.	 It	 is	 sheer	 bliss,	 pure	 peace,	 a	 tremendous	 light	 which	 is
inexhaustible.	Then	you	may	not	have	anything	in	the	world	but	you	are	a	king
or	a	queen,	because	the	kingdom	of	god	is	yours!
Mind	 is	 a	 hoarder	 of	 bitterness.	 It	 collects	 sounds,	 hurts,	 insults.	 It	 goes	 on
sulking	over	them	for	years.
Psychologists	are	very	aware	of	the	fact	that	something	said	when	you	were	only
four	years	old	may	have	hurt	you	so	much	that	it	is	still	there	like	a	wound,	still
oozing	pus.	You	don't	allow	it	to	be	healed.
You	go	on	fingering	the	wound	so	you	make	it	hurt	again	and	again,	again	and
again	you	create	 it,	never	giving	 it	an	opportunity	 to	be	healed	by	 itself.	 If	we
look	at	our	mind,	it	is	nothing	but	wounds	and	wounds.
Hence	life	becomes	a	hell;	we	collect	only	thorns.
A	man	may	have	been	loving	to	you	for	years,	he	may	have	been	compassionate,
kind	and	everything,	 and	he	 says	 just	one	 thing	which	hurts	you,	 and	years	of
love	and	friendship	disappear.	That	one	thing	becomes	important,	weighs	more
than	all	that	he	has	done.	You	will	forget	all	his	love	and	his	friendship	and	all
his	sacrifices	for	you.	You	will	remember	that	one	thing	--	and	you	would	like	to
take	revenge.
This	is	the	way	of	the	mind.	Mind	functions	in	a	very	ugly	way.	It	has	no	grace.
Go	beyond	the	mind	and	you	go	beyond	all	bitterness.	And	the	more	you	surpass
the	mind,	the	more	your	life	becomes	sweet,	as	sweet	as	honey.
Meditation	 is	 sweet,	 mind	 is	 bitter.	 Move	 from	 mind	 to	 meditation.	 Surpass
mind.	don't	be	controlled	and	dominated	by	the	mind;	be	a	master.	Then	mind	is
perfectly	good,	then	you	can	use	it.	Once	you	know	what	meditation	is,	once	you
know	how	you	can	be	without	the	mind,	you	can	use	the	mind	and	mind	cannot
use	you.	That	is	the	moment	when	the	gestalt	changes	inside,	when	the	rebellion
happens,	when	the	fragrance	is	released.
Meditation	 is	 a	 sword.	 It	 cuts	 off	 your	 head	 completely.	 It	 cuts	 your	 mind
entirely.	 As	 far	 as	 mind	 is	 concerned,	 meditation	 is	 a	 death,	 the	 death	 of	 the
mind.	But	as	far	as	you	are	concerned,	it	 is	a	birth;	you	are	born.	So	the	sword
has	a	double	function.	So	on	the	one	hand	the	sword	kills	the	false,	on	the	other
hand	it	gives	birth	to	the	true,	to	the	real.
By	meditation	I	mean	awareness.
In	 the	West	meditation	has	 a	 different	 connotation.	At	 the	most,	 at	 the	best,	 it
means	 contemplation.	 In	 the	 East	 it	 is	 totally	 different.	 It	 does	 not	 mean
contemplation	at	all.	It	is	not	concentration,	it	is	not	contemplation	--	because	it
is	not	thinking	at	all.
Concentration	 is	 thinking	 in	 a	 focussed,	 centred	way,	 thinking	 on	 a	 particular
object,	 not	 going	 astray	 here	 and	 there,	 remaining	with	 one	 object	 for	 a	 long
period.	and	contemplation	means	that	the	object	is	not	concrete	but	abstract;	for
example,	love	or	truth	or	god.	so	you	cannot	concentrate	as	you	can	concentrate
on	 the	 flame	of	 a	 lamp,	but	you	can	contemplate.	You	can	go	on	moving	 in	a
subtle	way	around	the	abstract	subject	but	you	don't	go	away	from	it,	you	remain
close	by.	You	look	at	all	the	sides,	all	the	aspects	of	it;	all	the	aspects	of	love,	all
the	possibilities	of	love,	all	the	meanings	of	love.	You	remain	in	that	climate	of
love.
that	is	contemplation.
But	 meditation	 is	 going	 out	 of	 the	 mind,	 it	 is	 transcending	 the	 mind,	 it	 is
becoming	a	witness	to	the	mind.	One	simply	watches	whatsoever	goes	on	in	the
mind.	One	is	neither	for	nor	against.	One	has	no	evaluation.	One	does	not	want
to	stop	it	either,	one	does	not	want	to	remain	with	a	certain	object	or	certain	idea.
One	is	not	 interested.	One	 is	cool,	aloof,	unconcerned,	as	 if	one	 is	standing	by
the	 side	 of	 the	 road	 and	 the	 traffic	 is	 going	 by.	 In	 just	 the	 same	way	 you	 are
sitting	by	 the	side	of	 the	 road	and	 the	 traffic	of	 the	mind	goes	by	and	you	are
absolutely	unconcerned.
That	unconcernedness	is	meditation.	and	in	that	unconcernedness	sooner	or	later
mind	disappears,	because	mind	can	exist	only	through	your	co-operation.	If	you
are	cold,	unconcerned,	aloof,	your	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
co-operation	has	disappeared.	You	are	no	more	nourishing	the	mind,	you	are	no
more	supporting	it.	It	has	lost	all	its	support.	It	may	continue	for	a	time	out	of	the
past	momentum,	but	sooner	or	later	the	momentum	is	lost	and	the	mind	stops.
That	stopping	of	the	mind	is	meditation.	And	that	is	really	a	sword,	it	cuts	off	the
mind	completely,	 it	makes	you	headless.	But	 it	gives	birth	 to	a	new	heart,	 to	a
new	being,	to	a	new	soul.
That's	 the	 whole	 process	 of	 sannyas.	 Sannyas	 is	 a	 sword.	 it	 is	 a	 death	 and	 a
resurrection.
Meditation	means	a	state	of	no-mind.	It	is	the	art	of	slipping	out	of	the	mind.
We	 are	 encaged	 in	 the	 mind,	 we	 are	 constantly	 surrounded	 by	 memories,
thoughts,	desires.	It	 is	a	crowd,	a	big	crowd.	Although	you	feel	suffocated	you
know	 nothing	 about	 how	 to	 get	 of	 this	 crowd,	 because	 wherever	 you	 go	 the
crowd	follows	you.	It	is	within	you	so	you	cannot	escape	from	it.	Even	in	your
dreams	it	is	there,	even	sleep	is	not	a	way	to	escape	from	it.
In	sleep	you	escape	from	the	world;	you	escape	from	your	wife,	your	husband,
your	 children,	 your	 office,	 your	 boss;	 you	 escape	 from	 everything	 --	 but	 you
cannot	 escape	 from	 your	mind.	 the	mind	 continues,	 in	 fact	 it	 becomes	 louder
than	ever.	It	occupies	your	sleep	totally,	so	totally	that	it	looks	as	if	your	dreams
are	real.
Meditation	is	nothing	but	the	simple	art	of	slipping	out	of	the	mind,	just	like	the
snake	slips	out	of	its	old	skin.	It	is	a	simple	phenomenon.	It	looks	difficult	in	the
beginning	 because	 we	 have	 forgotten	 it.	 For	 centuries	 we	 have	 not	 been	 in
contact	with	the	art,	but	once	you	learn	the	knack	of	it,	it	is	very	simple.
It	 is	 like	 swimming:	 one	 who	 does	 not	 know	 it	 thinks	 it	 is	 very	 difficult,
obviously.	 He	 feels	 so	 afraid	 of	 the	 deep	waters	 and	 the	 danger.	 How	 can	 he
believe	 that	 swimming	 is	 a	 very	 simple	 phenomenon?	 It	 is	 very	 simple,	 so
simple	that	a	Japanese	scientist	has	been	able	to	teach	six-month-old	kids	how	to
swim.	And	he	is	now	trying	to	teach	three-month-old	kids	how	to	swim,	and	he
hopes	that	he	will	succeed.
I	 perfectly	 agree	with	 him,	 he	will	 succeed,	 because	 the	 child	 in	 the	mother's
womb	remains	swimming	in	liquid	for	nine	months.	the	liquid	in	which	the	child
swims	in	the	mother's	womb	is	exactly	the	same	as	sea	water.	It	is	sea	water,	all
the	 chemicals	 are	 in	 the	 same	 proportion.	 So	 if	 he	 can	 survive	 that	 for	 nine
months	 and	 does	 not	 drown	 or	 anything...	 it	 seems	 that	 it	 will	 be	 possible	 to
teach	three-month-old	kids	to	swim.	it	is	a	simple	art.
Meditation	is	also	as	simple	as	that.
Terry	 has	 two	 meanings	 One	 comes	 from	 Latin;	 the	 Latin	 root	 means	 soft,
tender,	 smooth.	 Meditation	 can	 grow	 only	 if	 you	 are	 soft,	 tender,	 feminine.
Meditation	is	a	feminine	phenomenon,	it	is	not	masculine.
You	cannot	conquer	 it,	you	cannot	be	aggressive	about	 it.	You	have	to	be	very
very	 open,	 receptive,	 like	 a	 womb.	 You	 have	 to	 be	 vulnerable,	 available	 to
existence	 in	deep	 trust,	 in	 love,	so	 that	existence	can	start	 taking	possession	of
you.	That's	what	meditation	 is	 in	 its	 ultimate	 sense.	The	 individual	 disappears
and	 the	 universal	 remains.	 The	 ego	 is	 found	 no	 more,	 you	 are	 one	 with	 the
whole.
And	 the	 second	meaning	 comes	 from	 Irish;	 in	 Irish	 it	means	 like	 a	 tall	 tower.
Meditation	is	like	a	tall	tower	too.	It	is	the	highest	peak.	There	is	nothing	taller
than	 that,	 nothing	higher	 than	 that.	 It	 reaches	 to	 the	very	 sky,	 it	 penetrates	 the
beyond.
We	 are	 not	 minds.	 We	 are	 neither	 the	 body	 nor	 the	 mind,	 we	 are	 a	 third
phenomenon:	we	are	the	witness	of	it	all.	We	are	the	watchers	of	both	the	body
and	the	mind.	When	you	are	hungry	you	are	not	hungry,	the	body	is	hungry;	you
are	only	a	watcher.	But	you	become	identified	with	the	body,	then	you	say	'I	am
hungry.'	In	fact	you	should	say	'I	am	watching	that	the	body	is	hungry',	then	you
are	literally	stating	the	truth.
When	 you	 say	 'I	 am	 angry',	 again	 you	 are	making	 the	 same	mistake.	 It	 is	 the
mind	which	is	full	of	anger,	you	are	the	watcher.	You	should	say	'I	can	see	that
the	mind	 is	 full	 of	 anger,	 that	 the	mind	 is	 full	 of	 lust,	 that	 the	mind	 is	 full	 of
greed,	that	the	mind	is	in	a	turmoil	or	at	peace	--	but	I	am	always	the	watcher.'
To	 know	 this	 watcher	 is	 to	 be	 free,	 liberated	 from	 all	 limitations.	 The	 whole
process	 of	 meditation	 can	 be	 reduced	 to	 the	 single	 word	 'watch'.	 That's	 why
Jesus	uses	the	word	so	much.	Again	and	again	he	says:	Watch,	be	watchful,	be
alert.
Slowly	 slowly	 get	 out	 of	 all	 identifications	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be	 a	 pure
consciousness.	The	purity	of	consciousness,	that	innocence,	brings	god	to	you.	It
becomes	the	merger,	the	melting	with	the	whole.
One	in	that	innocence	can	we	know.	Mind	knows	nothing.	It	is	full	of	garbage,
full	of	knowledge	but	knows	nothing.	The	witness	has	no	knowledge	but	knows.
Its	knowing	is	of	a	totally	different	category,	of	a	different	plane.	It	sees.	It	is	not
like	 information,	 it	 is	 not	 borrowed.	 It	 is	 one's	 own.	 And	 when	 you	 see	 the
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
truth	it	liberates.	Only	your	own	truth	can	liberate	you.
God	has	no	form,	hence	he	cannot	manifest	 in	all	 forms.	If	he	had	a	particular
form	then	the	whole	manifestation	would	be	impossible.
God	 is	 not	 separate	 from	his	 creation.	He	 is	 one	with	 it,	 he	 is	 the	 very	 living
spirit	of	it	all.	In	the	trees	he	is	green,	in	the	roses	he	is	red,	in	the	rock	he	is	a
rock.	All	 these	forms	are	his.	It	 is	possible	only	because	he	has	no	form	of	his
own.	He	is	very	liquid,	very	flexible.	Hence	this	multi-dimensional	existence	is
possible.
He	 is	you	 in	you,	he	 is	me	 in	me,	and	yet	he	 is	not	 confined	 to	any	 form.	He
takes	all	forms	but	remains	beyond	the	forms.
One	comes	to	know	this	as	one	goes	deeper	into	meditation.	The	deeper	you	go,
the	farther	away	you	are	from	your	own	body.	The	body	has	form,	a	fixed	form,
and	when	you	go	 far	 into	meditation,	 you	know	you	 are	 not	 the	 body,	 so	 that
form	disappears.	It	is	no	more	yours.	It	is	the	form	of	the	house	you	are	abiding
in.
Go	a	little	deeper	still	and	the	mind	is	also	left	very	very	far	behind.	and	all	the
forms	of	the	mind	--
memory,	 thought,	 imagination	 --	 they	 also	 start	 disappearing	 into	 the	distance.
Now	you	know	you	are	not	the	mind	either.	You	are	only	a	pure	witness,	a	seer,
or	 rather,	 only	 the	 capacity	 to	 see,	 a	 seeing,	 a	 consciousness.	 and	 then	 you
suddenly	become	aware	that	consciousness	has	no	form,	it	is	formless.
Knowing	 one's	 consciousness,	 one	 comes	 to	 know	 that	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 the
case	with	the	whole	too.	If	my	consciousness	is	formless	then	the	consciousness
that	 permeates	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 formless.	 Hence	 I	 say	 that
although	 god	 is	 indefinable,	 if	 one	 persists,	 insists	 on	 defining	 him,	 then	 this
definition	comes	closest	to	the	truth,	that	he	is	formlessness.	and	this	is	the	goal
of	all	meditators	to	attain,	an	experience	of	their	own	formlessness.
The	day	it	is	achieved	one	becomes	a	Buddha,	a	Christ.	Then	one	is	no	more	a
mortal.	One	becomes	immortal,	one	becomes	a	god.
The	rock	represents	strength,	stability,	eternity.	It	defies	changes,	it	defies	time,	it
persists.	 It	 has	 a	 deep	perseverance.	Everything	 else	 goes	on	 changing	but	 the
rock	remains	the	same.	the	trees	change,	people	change	--	people	come	and	go,
children	are	born	and	old	men	die	--	but	the	rock	remains	the	same.	It	is	the	most
stable	thing	in	ordinary	existence.	It	represents	something	of	god,	the	eternity	of
god.	It	 is	not	accidental	 that	 the	first	 images	of	god	were	made	of	rock,	 just	 to
symbolise	the	fact	that	god	is	unchanging,	that	god	is	beyond	time.
Everything	else	is	a	flux.	don't	make	your	house	on	sands	because	then	you	will
suffer,	 you	will	 fall	 into	 darkness.	 don't	 try	 to	make	 your	 signature	 on	 water,
because	 even	 before	 you	 are	 finished	 it	 will	 have	 disappeared.	 So	 is	 the	 case
with	time.
Time	 means	 change;	 and	 one	 has	 to	 go	 beyond	 time	 to	 know	 that	 which	 is
always	the	same,	that	which	abides.	Only	in	that	can	we	have	real	shelter,	only
in	god	is	our	security.
Meditation	is	a	way	to	go	beyond	time...	because	time	is	part	of	the	mind.	When
you	move	 away	 from	 the	mind	 you	move	 away	 from	 time.	 the	moment	mind
stops,	the	clock	stops,	time	disappears.	Hours	can	pass	and	you	will	not	feel	that
anything	has	passed.	When	one	is	really	in	meditation	time	leaves	no	trace	--
as	 if	 nothing	 has	 changed,	 nothing	 has	 passed.	 Everything	 else	 outside	 has
changed,	but	because	you	are	in	a	state	of	no-time	you	cannot	see	any	change.
When	you	come	back	to	the	mind	of	course	you	will	see	the	changes,	but	now
you	know	a	deep	centre	within	yourself	which	is	always	beyond	time.	And	you
can	always	move	there	to	rest,	to	relax,	to	be	rejuvenated.
That	point	 is	beyond	death	 too.	 In	 India	we	have	 the	same	word	for	death	and
time,	because	time	leads	to	death.	Time	is	basically	death,	it	is	not	life.	To	know
life	one	has	to	know	that	which	is	not	time.	And	once	you	have	tasted	something
of	timelessness	within	yourself,	you	know	that	you	are	not	going	to	die.	the	fear,
the	anxiety,	 the	 trembling	disappears.	Then	 life	starts	again	with	a	new	vigour,
with	a	new	ecstasy	and	euphoria.	That	is	true	birth.
Monika	 is	 a	 beautiful	word.	 It	 has	 two	meanings;	 one	 comes	 from	Greek,	 the
other	 from	Latin.	Although	 the	 sources	are	very	different	 they	 seem	 to	be	 two
aspects	of	the	same	coin.
The	 first	 meaning	 that	 comes	 from	 the	 Greek	 root	 is	 alone,	 aloneness.
Remember,	 it	does	not	mean	loneliness.	Loneliness	is	a	negative	state.	You	are
missing	the	other,	you	are	miserable,	you	are	empty.
aloneness	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	other.	You	are	rejoicing	in	your	being,	you
are	happy	being	alone;	it	is	a	positive	state.	You	are	full	of	your	own	presence,	so
full	 that	 nothing	else	 is	needed,	nobody	else	 is	 needed,	 just	 to	be	 is	 sheer	 joy.
That	is	aloneness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	the	other	meaning	comes	from	Latin;	it	is	wisdom.	Wisdom	arises	only	out
of	aloneness,	there	is	not	other	way	for	it	to	arise.	Only	a	man	who	is	capable	of
being	alone	becomes	wise.	Being	alone	is	the	whole	process	of	meditation.	And
the	ultimate	result,	the	end	result,	is	wisdom.
Discretion	 is	a	by-product	of	meditation.	as	you	become	more	and	more	silent
you	become	capable	of	 seeing	what	 is	 right	and	what	 is	wrong.	 If	you	are	not
silent	 then	 you	 have	 to	 depend	 on	 others.	 They	 tell	 you	 --	 the	 priests,	 the
politicians,	the	parents	--	what	is	right	and	what	is	wrong.	And	of	course	nobody
else	can	decide	it	for	you.	Any	decision	imposed	on	you	by	others	cripples	your
freedom,	destroys	your	integrity.
You	may	have	a	respectable	life	following	others	but	you	cannot	have	a	true	life,
you	cannot	 live	 authentically,	 sincerely.	When	you	have	your	own	 insight	 into
right	 and	wrong	 then	 it	 is	 a	 totally	 different	matter.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 struggle
against	the	wrong	and	no	effort	to	do	the	right.	It	happens	naturally	because	you
know	it	is	right.	If	you	know	then	it	is	natural,	if	others	tell	you	what	is	right	then
it	is	imposed,	unnatural.	and	to	be	unnatural	is	to	lose	all	grace,	all	beauty.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 help	 you	 attain	 your	 own	 insight	 into	 things,	 your	 own
awareness,	so	that	you	need	not	depend	on	anybody	else.	Dependence	is	bad;	it
is	 a	 form	 of	 slavery,	 it	 is	 against	 our	 intrinsic	 being.	 Our	 intrinsic	 being	 can
bloom	only	in	freedom.
There	is	one	sky	outside,	there	is	another	inside	--	and	unless	we	are	acquainted
with	the	sky	inside	our	acquaintance	with	the	sky	outside	is	very	superficial.
Only	 by	 knowing	 the	 inner	 space	 do	 we	 know	 the	 outer.	 the	 inner	 is	 the
foundation.	 The	 outer	 is	 just	 a	 flowering,	 the	 inner	 has	 the	 roots.	 The	 outer
depends	on	the	inner.	The	outer	 is	 just	a	circumference,	 the	inner	is	 the	centre.
And	 just	 as	 the	outer	 sky	 is	vast,	 infinite,	 so	 is	 the	 inner,	but	more	vast,	more
infinite.
Meditation	is	the	only	way	to	be	acquainted	with	it.	Meditation	is	nothing	but	the
process	of	turning	in.
We	are	looking	outside,	we	have	become	focussed.	We	have	to	learn	to	look	in.
We	have	to	relax.	Our	muscles	have	become	tense,	have	become	rigid;	they	have
to	 be	made	 flexible.	 Our	 necks	 are	 paralysed	 because	 for	 lives	we	 have	 been
looking	 outside;	 hence	 we	 have	 lost	 he	 capacity	 to	 turn	 in.	 Otherwise	 it	 is	 a
simple	 process.	Meditation	 is	 not	 anything	 difficult,	 it	 is	 very	 simple.	 Even	 a
child	can	do	it.	A	child	can	do	it	more	easily	than	a	grown-up	person	because	the
grown-up	 person	 becomes	 more	 fixated	 on	 the	 outside,	 he	 becomes	 more
obsessed	with	the	outside.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	taking	a	decisive	step	in	your	life.	The	most
significant	step	 that	one	can	 take	 is	 to	decide	 that	 'Now	I	will	explore	 into	my
inner	 being,	 who	 I	 am.'	 And	 that	 begins	 a	 great	 journey,	 a	 great	 pilgrimage
towards	the	ultimate.
(To	a	ten-year-old)
Vinod...	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names.	It	means	laughter!	Learn	to	laugh....
and	don't	be	a	miser	in	it.
Laughter	is	your	meditation.	Laugh	for	any	reason...	or	for	no	reason.
Just	the	other	day	I	was	reading	the	autobiography	of	a	famous	author.	He	writes
about	his	small	son,	his	 three-year-old	son,	who	got	 into	 the	habit	of	saying	 to
everybody	 and	 anybody	 'Shut	 up!'	 He	 loved	 it	 so	 much	 that	 he	 became	 a
nuisance.	The	teachers	from	the	school	complained	that	he	would	suddenly	start
shouting	 'Shut	 up!'	 And	 the	 family	 started	 becoming	 embarrassed	 because	 to
invite	anybody	home	was	dangerous.	He	might	come	any	time	and	for	no	reason
at	all	simply	shout	at	the	person	'Shut	up!'
So	one	day	the	father	called	him	and	told	him,	'You	enjoy	it,	we	know,	but	it	is
creating	embarrassing	situations	for	us.	So	please	learn	one	thing:	whenever	the
urge	arises	in	you	to	say	'Shut	up!',	say	to	yourself
'Shut	 up!'	 inside...	 no	 need	 to	 tell	 anybody.	 So	 your	 urge	will	 be	 fulfilled	 and
there	will	be	no	problem.'
So	for	 two	or	 three	days	 the	father	and	 the	mother	watched:	 the	boy	would	sit
somewhere	 and	 suddenly	 would	 start	 gigging.	 so	 they	 became	 puzzled	 about
what	was	happening.	They	asked	'Now	what	new	thing	have	you	started?'
He	said,	'This	is	so	beautiful!	When	the	urge	arises	in	me	to	say	'Shut	up,'	and	I
say	 'shut	 up!'	 nobody	 is	 annoyed	 and	nobody	 is	 irritated	 and	nobody	becomes
angry	at	me.	I	start	giggling	because	I	am	deceiving	everybody.	Nobody	knows
what	I	am	doing!'
So	learn	to	giggle	and	deceive	everybody.	Don't	be	worried	about	what	they	are
thinking.	right?
It	 is	meditation	 that	 is	 the	 ultimate	 experience	 of	 life.	 It	 crowns	 you,	 there	 is
nothing	higher	than	it.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
through	 meditation	 that	 Jesus	 becomes	 a	 Christ	 and	 Siddhartha	 Gautama
becomes	a	Buddha.	It	is	through	meditation	that	people	have	known	their	inner
kingdom,	 the	 inexhaustible	 treasures	 of	 their	 being.	 They	 have	 come	 to	 know
their	 truth,	 their	 consciousness,	 their	 bliss,	 satchidanand.	 But	 it	 all	 happens
through	meditation.	There	is	no	other	way	for	it	to	happen,	there	is	no	alternative
to	meditation.
Meditation	means	becoming	silent,	still,	thoughtless	but	fully	aware.	Meditation
can	be	reduced	to	a	small	definition:	no	mind	and	all	awareness.
Right	now	there	is	no	awareness	and	all	mind.	Right	now	one	hundred	per	cent	is
mind	and	zero	per	cent	is	awareness.	We	have	to	change	the	whole	phenomenon:
we	have	to	bring	awareness	to	one	hundred	per	cent	and	mind	to	zero	per	cent.
then	one	becomes	an	emperor.	Then	you	know	that	this	whole	existence	is	yours,
that	 all	 the	 stars	 are	 yours.	 Then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 possess	 anything,	 it	 is
already	yours.	There	is	no	need	to	desire	anything,	it	is	already	given	to	you.	The
whole	existence	is	given	to	you	as	a	gift;	but	we	have	not	been	able	to	recognise
it	yet.	We	have	no	yet	been	able	to	see	what	has	been	given	to	us:	 the	life,	 the
love,	 the	 joy.	We	 are	 concerned	 about	 small,	mundane	 things	 and	wasting	 our
time,	life,	energy.
Meditation	 brings	 into	 focus	 the	 reality	 of	 who	 you	 are	 and	what	 your	 really
possess.	Knowing	it,	all	misery,	all	anxiety	disappears.	Knowing	it,	one	is	freed
from	all	darkness,	one	becomes	light	itself.	That	is	the	crowning	process.
Meditation	opens	the	door	of	all	the	mysteries.	Meditation	makes	you	aware	that
you	 are	 not	 a	mortal,	 you	 are	 immortal.	 It	makes	 you	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 not
separate	from	the	whole,	that	you	are	part	of	it...	not	only	part	of	it	but	that	you
are	the	whole.	Meditation	is	the	highest	peak;	hence	we	call	Jesus	the	crowned
one	or	Buddha	the	crowned	one.
Their	crown	is	not	the	ordinary	crown	of	ordinary	kings.	Their	kingdom	is	not	of
the	ordinary,	their	kingdom	is	of	the	sacred,	of	the	inner,	of	the	divine.	and	that's
what	is	meant	by	being	initiated	into	sannyas.
Now	the	search	for	your	real	being,	for	your	authentic	being	begins.
And	 by	 meditation	 I	 mean	 a	 state	 of	 no-mind,	 a	 state	 of	 no-thought,	 of	 pure
awareness,	 of	 a	 mirror	 reflecting	 nothing,	 just	 an	 empty	 mirror.	 The	 empty
mirror	 is	 exactly	 the	 right	 symbol	 for	 meditation.	 One	 can	 become	 an	 empty
mirror	if	by	watching	one's	thoughts,	one	slowly	slowly	drops	them.	In	fact	the
more	efficient	you	become	in	watching	your	thoughts,	 the	more	and	more	they
disappear	of	their	own	accord.
One	day	it	happens	that	there	is	no	thought	inside	you,	there	is	utter	silence:	no
ripples,	no	waves	 in	your	consciousness,	nothing	 is	 reflected	and	you	are	 fully
alert,	no	asleep	either.	That	is	the	day	when	one	becomes	the	crowned	one.
Let	that	be	the	goal	from	now	onwards.	That	is	the	target.	It	has	to	be	fulfilled	in
this	life,	and	it	can	be	fulfilled.	It	is	our	birthright,	we	just	have	not	claimed	it.
Meditation	 is	 the	 technique	of	 inner	 conquest	 --	 and	 that	 is	 the	 real	 challenge.
Those	who	have	any	guts	should	accept	 the	inner	challenge.	It	 is	easy	to	reach
the	moon,	 it	 is	easy	to	reach	Everest;	 it	 is	far	more	difficult	 to	reach	your	own
centre.	But	the	moment	you	reach	it	all	ecstasy	is	yours,	and	forever	and	forever.
You	attain	to	a	bliss	which	cannot	be	taken	away	from	you.
Jesus	calls	it	the	kingdom	of	god.	The	moment	you	enter	into	it	you	are	a	king,	it
is	your	kingdom;	you	are	a	god.
It	has	 two	meanings	because	 it	 can	either	be	derived	 from	Latin	 roots	or	 from
Teutonic	roots.	Through	Latin	it	means	a	queen,	 through	the	Teutonic	 it	means
pure,	purified,	purity.	Both	are	beautiful.
It	is	through	an	inner	process	of	purity	that	one	really	becomes	a	king	or	a	queen.
We	are	born	to	be	kings	and	queens.	It	is	really	very	sad	to	see	the	earth	full	of
beggars;	 poor	 beggars,	 rich	 beggars,	 but	 all	 beggars.	 They	 have	 money,	 they
have	palaces,	but	 their	souls	are	still	begging,	 they	are	still	asking	for	more.	 to
ask	for	more	is	to	be	a	beggar.	To	be	contented	with	whatsoever	is	available	is	to
be	a	king	or	a	queen.	But	before	one	can	attain	 to	 that	contentment	one	has	 to
pass	 through	 a	 process	 of	 purification,	 because	 the	 society	 contaminates	 us.	 It
does	not	only	contaminate	 the	air,	 the	water,	 the	 rivers,	 the	 lakes,	 the	ocean;	 it
contaminates	more	 than	 that;	 it	contaminates	 the	mind	--	and	its	contamination
of	the	mind	is	far	more	dangerous	because	we	are	very	close	to	the	mind.	and	the
mind	affects	the	soul,	the	mind	starts	being	reflected	in	the	soul.	The	soul	has	to
live	through	the	mind,	it	has	to	use	the	mind	as	a	vehicle.	Although	the	soul	can
never	be	contaminated,	because	of	 its	deep	association	with	 the	mind	it	almost
becomes	contaminated.	By	the	process	of	purification	I	mean	one	has	to	drop	all
that	 one	 has	 learned,	 because	 truth	 can	 never	 be	 learned.	 So	 whatsoever	 you
have	learned	is	untrue.	One	has	to	drop	all	the	scriptures,	because	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
truth	can	never	be	expressed	in	words,	and	whatsoever	is	expressed	in	words	is
no	more	true.	 to	be	really	purified	one	has	to	get	rid	of	all	kinds	of	ideologies.
They	 are	 poisonous,	 they	 destroy	 your	 innocence.	And	 it	 is	 only	 in	 innocence
that	one	comes	across	god.
Purity	means	innocence,	the	innocence	of	a	child,	the	innocence	of	a	flower,	the
innocence	of	the	dewdrops	in	the	early	sun	--	that	freshness.
Purity	does	not	mean	that	one	has	to	become	a	saint,	and	one	has	to	eat	this	and
not	eat	that,	and	one	has	to	sleep	at	a	certain	hour,	and	do	certain	rituals	and	has
to	do	five	prayers	every	day,	five	 times.	Those	are	all	 rituals.	They	don't	make
you	pure,	in	fact	they	are	the	causes	of	your	impurity.
Your	 saints,	 the	 so-called	 saints	 are	 the	most	 impure	 people	 in	 the	 world.	 Of
course	from	the	outside	they	seem	to	be	utterly	sacred,	but	deep	down	they	are
boiling	because	 their	whole	 process	 of	 life	 is	 repressive,	 and	nobody	becomes
pure	by	repressing.	It	is	repression	that	makes	you	impure.	To	be	pure	means	to
drop	 all	 repressive	 methods,	 all	 taboos.	 Come	 out	 of	 all	 that	 nonsense	 that
society	has	imposed	upon	you.	Purity	means	a	process	of	de-hypnotisation.
The	 society	 has	 hypnotised	 you	 in	 a	 certain	way.	 Every	 society	 does	 that;	 the
society	depends	on	hypnosis.	The	church,	the	temple,	the	religious	education	--
these	 are	 all	 methods	 of	 hypnotising	 people,	 of	 conditioning	 their	 minds,	 of
destroying	their	capacity	to	discover	truth.	Giving	them	ready-made	conclusions
destroys	their	greatest	joy	of	life.	They	will	never	be	able	to	discover	the	truth	on
their	own,	and	unless	you	discover	the	truth	on	your	own	it	cannot	liberate	you.
Somebody	 else's	 truth	 is	 never	 your	 truth,	 can	 never	 be	 your	 truth.	 Somebody
else's	truth	is	a	lie	for	you.	Somebody	else's	truth	is	going	to	create	a	bondage	for
you.	It	is	only	your	truth	that	liberates.
So	 getting	 rid	 of	 all	 this	 rubbish	 that	 the	 society	 goes	 on	 pouring	 into	 every
psyche	 is	 what	 I	 call	 meditation.	 Meditation	 is	 a	 process	 of	 de-hypnosis,	 of
unconditioning	the	mind	and	leaving	a	person	in	a	state	of	pure	innocence.
When	one	can	 function	 from	a	 state	of	not-knowing,	god	 is	 closest.	when	one
can	unlearn	all	that	one	knows	and	can	say	'I	know	nothing'	--	not	only	say	it	but
feel	in	every	fibre	of	one's	being	'I	know	nothing,'
--	one	has	become	a	child	again.	Now	one's	eyes	will	again	see	the	wonder	that
surrounds	 us,	 the	 splendour	 that	 is	 all	 over	 the	 place.	 That	 wonder,	 that
splendour,	 is	 the	 first	 indication	of	god's	presence.	 there	 is	no	other	proof,	and
there	is	no	need	for	any	other	proof.	This	existence	is	proof	enough,	but	our	eyes
are	so	full	of	knowledge	that	we	have	lost	all	contact	with	existence.
Our	eyes	have	to	be	cleaned	again.
Meditation	 takes	 you	 into	 a	 virgin	 territory,	 into	 the	 unknown,	 into	 absolute
purity.	Only	meditation	is	capable	of	becoming	a	boat	 to	the	further	shore.	and
meditation	 is	 the	 only	 phenomenon	 which	 cannot	 be	 contaminated	 by	 words.
Virginity	is	intrinsic	to	it,	purity	is	its	very	soul.	You	cannot	make	it	impure,	that
is	impossible.
By	meditation	I	mean	a	state	of	no-mind.	Mind	is	always	corrupt	because	mind
is	cunning.	We	call	it	cleverness...	it	is	nothing	but	cunningness,	a	good	name	for
cunningness.	Mind	is	very	political,	diplomatic,	tricky,	always	trying	to	deceive	-
-	not	only	others,	but	you	too.	It	 is	a	double-edged	sword,	 it	cuts	both	ways:	 it
deceives	people,	it	deceives	you.	It	is	deception	incarnate.
Until	we	get	out	of	 the	mind	we	don't	know	what	being	virgin	means.	When	I
use	 the	word	 'virgin'	 I	am	not	using	 it	 in	any	sexual	 sense,	 I	am	using	 it	 in	 its
highest	spiritual	meaning.	A	real	virgin	is	one	who	is	deep	in	meditation,	utterly
still	and	silent;	not	even	a	single	thought	passes	by.	When	there	is	no	thought,	no
traffic	of	thoughts,	then	you	are	pure.	Thoughts	are	like	dust;	they	gather	on	the
mirror	of	the	mind.
When	the	mind	is	without	dust	it	becomes	no-mind.	and	no-mind	is	virgin.	And
god	 can	 be	 experienced	 only	 in	 profound	 purity.	 Even	 if	 a	 slight	 impurity
remains	 in	 you,	 that	means	 that	 a	 little	 part	 of	 your	 being	 remains	 dark,	 ugly,
unconscious,	and	that	will	be	the	hindrance	between	you	and	god.
Total	purity	is	needed	to	create	the	bridge.
Meditation	is	the	art	of	discovering	the	light	within,	the	art	of	digging	inwards,
the	 art	 of	 penetrating	 your	 own	 soul.	 It	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 difficult	 arts	 int	 he
world	because	it	hurts	to	go	in.	All	your	interests	are	on	the	outside,	and	when
you	 go	 in	many	 interests	 have	 to	 be	 sacrificed.	All	 your	 life	 is	 extrovert,	 and
when	you	go	in	you	have	to	find	time,	space	for	the	inward	journey.
It	also	hurts	because	when	you	dig	inside	you	have	to	throw	much	garbage	out	of
your	 being;	 and	 there	 are	 layers	 and	 layers	 of	 garbage	 inside.	 It	 has	 been
accumulating	for	many	lives.	It	has	almost	become	part	of	you,	it	clings	to	you,
and	 you	 have	 to	 cut	 it	 out	 and	 throw	 it	 away	 from	 you.	 It	 feels	 as	 if	 you	 are
cutting	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
your	own	limbs,	hence	it	hurts.
It	also	hurts	because	as	you	start	digging	into	your	own	being	you	don't	suddenly
come	 to	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god.	 It	 is	 like	 digging	 a	 well:	 first	 you	 come	 across
rocks,	 all	 kinds	 of	 rubbish	 that	 has	 gathered;	 the	 earth	 is	 very	 hard	 and	 there
seems	to	be	no	hope	of	any	water	anywhere,	you	don't	see	any	signs...	But	you
go	on	dipping.	Slowly	slowly	softer	layers	are	found,	then	muddy	waters.	If	you
go	on	 digging	 then	 one	 day	 you	will	 stumble	 upon	 the	 sources	 of	 fresh	water
streams,	but	it	is	a	long	process.
Meditation	 is	 the	 only	 way,	 remember	 it,	 the	 only	 way	 to	 know	 oneself,	 to
discover	 oneself,	 to	 know	 the	 truth	 of	 life.	 In	 short	 meditation	 simply	 means
becoming	aware	of	your	body-mind	complex,	becoming	unattached,	unidentified
with	the	body-mind	complex,	becoming	a	witness.
When	 you	 have	 achieved	 that	 point	 of	witnessing,	with	 no	 attachment	 and	 no
identification,	you	have	 learned	 the	art.	 then	you	have	 the	right	means	 to	enter
into	 yourself.	 Then	 nobody	 can	 hinder	 you,	 no	 power	 can	 hinder	 you	 from
knowing	 your	 own	 inner	 being.	Without	 knowing	 it,	 life	 is	 meaningless.	 The
moment	you	know	it	 life	becomes	tremendously	significant.	It	 is	all	splendour,
all	music.
Meditation	 is	 the	only	 force	 that	can	 turn	evil	 away.	 It	 attracts	 the	good	 like	a
magnet	and	it	repels	evil.
Meditation	is	like	a	it	candle:	it	dispels	darkness.	Evil	is	nothing	but	darkness,	it
has	no	positive	existence.
It's	 exactly	 like	 darkness,	 darkness	 also	 has	 no	 positive	 existence.	 It	 is	 only
absence	of	light,	not	presence	of	something,	so	you	cannot	do	anything	directly
with	darkness.	If	you	want	to	bring	darkness	into	the	room	you	have	to	turn	the
light	off;	you	cannot	go	out	and	gather	darkness	in	a	bucket	and	bring	it	in.
You	 cannot	 invite	 darkness	 in.	 And	 if	 you	 want	 to	 remove	 the	 darkness	 you
cannot	push	it	away	either,	you	cannot	fight	with	it.	You	will	be	tired,	exhausted,
and	the	darkness	will	remain	wherever	it	is.
Nothing	can	be	done	directly	with	darkness	because	it	has	no	positive	existence.
If	you	want	to	do	anything	with	darkness	you	will	have	to	go	via	light,	you	will
have	to	do	something	to	light.	If	you	don't	want	darkness	put	the	light	on,	if	you
want	darkness	turn	the	light	off.
That	is	exactly	the	case	with	meditation:	meditation	is	inner	light.	If	you	put	it	on
it	dispels	darkness,	evil.	Evil	has	no	existence	of	its	own.	god	has	existence,	the
devil	is	only	an	absence	of	god.	so	you	cannot	meet	the	devil	anywhere.	He	does
not	 exist,	 he	 is	only	 a	 shadow	phenomenon.	When	you	 forget	 about	god	he	 is
very	 much	 there,	 but	 it	 is	 because	 you	 have	 forgotten	 god.	 The	moment	 you
remember	god	the	devil	is	nowhere	to	be	found.
Go	 deep	 into	meditation.	And	 by	meditation	 I	mean	 awareness,	watchfulness,
witnessing.
It	is	only	through	meditation	that	the	inner	light	begins.	Otherwise	man	lives	in
darkness.	Meditation	enkindles	something	that	is	latent	in	all	of	us,	but	needs	to
be	provoked.
We	are	 looking	outwards.	Our	backs	 are	 at	our	 inner	 source;	hence	 it	 is	being
neglected,	 ignored.	 and	 to	 ignore	 one's	 inner	 being	 is	 the	 only	 ignorance.	 To
know	 it	 is	 the	 only	 knowledge.	All	 other	 knowledge	 is	worthless.	 It	may	help
you	 in	 the	 world	 but	 it	 can't	 help	 you	 in	 eternity.	 And	 this	 life	 is	 a	 small
phenomenon,	the	real	life	is	a	totally	different	affair.
This	is	only	a	soap	bubble.	Seventy	years	or	eighty	years	are	nothing	compared
to	eternity	 --	 just	nothing.	Even	a	 soap	bubble	 exists	 longer.	To	pay	 too	much
attention	 to	 this	 life	 and	 not	 to	 pay	 attention	 at	 all	 to	 the	 inner	 is	 foolish.	But
that's	what	millions	of	people	go	on	doing;	hence	the	world	is	full	of	stupidity,
full	of	darkness,	full	of	ugliness,	full	of	suffering.
The	moment	one	 turns	 in...	The	very	 turning	of	 the	 attention	enkindles	 a	 light
inside	which	is	simply	waiting	for	you	to	look	at.	Your	attention	begins	a	light
inside	you	which	knows	no	end.	Once	it	has	started	it	goes	on	spreading.	First	it
fills	 you,	 then	 it	 starts	 spreading	 outside	 you,	 and	 ultimately	 it	 fills	 the	whole
universe.
The	man	who	attains	 to	 that	state	where	his	 inner	 light	becomes	as	vast	as	 the
universe	 itself	 is	 called	 the	enlightened	one,	 the	awakened	one,	 the	Christ,	 the
Buddha.
Brigitte	in	Celtic	mythology	is	the	goddess	of	wisdom	and	song.	That	is	a	very
strange	combination.
Ordinarily	wise	people	are	not	singing	people,	and	th	singers	are	not	thought	to
be	wise.	Humanity	has	lived	according	to	the	sad	people,	the	non-singing	people.
Sad	people	have	been	dominant	up	 to	now;	 they	have	been	 the	 saints.	 and	 the
more	 sad	a	person	 is,	 the	 longer	 is	 face,	 the	wiser	people	 think	he	 is.	But	 real
wisdom	is	really	a	song	of	the	heart.
So	 your	 name	 has	 a	 tremendously	 significant	 message:	 Become	 wise	 but	 not
serious.	 Your	 dance	 has	 to	 remain	 intact.	 don't	 lose	 cheerfulness,	 because	 a
wisdom	without	cheerfulness	is	not	worth	anything,	and	a	cheerfulness	without
wisdom	is	also	worthless.	Both	together	create	a	great	synthesis.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Another	meaning	of	brigitte	is	the	bridge.	If	you	can	manage	to	be	wise	and	to
be	celebrating,	 then	the	bridge	i	made	between	man	and	god.	Meditation	is	 the
bridge	between	man	and	god,	between	the	visible	and	the	invisible,	between	the
known	and	the	unknown,	between	the	material	and	the	spiritual.
Go	 deep	 into	 meditation.	 and	 be	 meditation	 I	 mean	 silence,	 awareness,
witnessing.	You	 can	meditate	 any	 time	 of	 the	 day,	 you	 can	meditate	working,
walking,	doing	things.	Meditation	is	not	something	separate	from	life;	it	should
not	 be	 separate,	 otherwise	 it	 remains	 a	 little	 artificial.	 Meditation	 should	 be
spread	all	over	life.	You	should	walk	in	meditation,	you	should	sit	in	meditation;
that	means	silently,	fully	aware.
Slowly	slowly	it	becomes	your	very	flavour,	then	the	bridge	is	created.
And	 through	 meditation	 comes	 wisdom	 --	 not	 through	 studying	 books,	 not
through	 scriptures.	 Through	 scriptures	 one	 can	 become	 knowledgeable	 but	 no
wise.	 and	knowledgeable	people	are	 sad,	 they	are	bound	 to	be	 sad	because	all
their	knowledge	is	borrowed.	There	can	be	no	song	in	it.
Wisdom	arises	out	of	meditation.	Our	*ot	silence	something	hidden	in	you	starts
blooming.	 That	 is	 wisdom.	 And	 whenever	 some	 flower	 blooms	 it	 releases
fragrance.	That	is	your	song.
We	are	not	aware	of	who	we	are.	We	are	not	aware	of	the	source	from	which	we
come,	why	we	come	at	all	in	the	first	place.	what	is	our	purpose?	Why	have	we
been	 sent	 into	 the	world?	There	must	 be	 some	message	 to	 be	 delivered,	 some
work	 to	be	done.	 something	has	 to	happen	 through	you.	Nobody	 is	accidental,
everybody	is	on	a	mission	--	unaware	of	course,	oblivious	to	the	mission.
We	are	not	aware,	but	 that	does	not	make	any	difference	 to	 the	 truth.	Whether
the	truth	is	known	or	not	known,	it	remains	the	truth;	just	not	knowing	it	makes
no	difference.	Everybody	is	here	on	a	certain	mission,	a	certain	purpose	has	to	be
fulfilled.	Somebody	has	to	sing	a	song,	somebody	has	to	dance	a	dance.
Unless	 you	 have	 done	 that	 for	 which	 you	 have	 been	 sent	 you	 will	 not	 feel
fulfilled,	you	will	not	feel	contented.	That's	why	there	is	so	much	misery.
The	root	cause	of	misery	 is	 that	we	are	doing	something	for	which	we	are	not
meant.	The	person	who	was	meant	to	be	a	singer	has	become	a	priest,	the	person
who	was	sent	to	be	a	dancer	has	become	a	governor.	Everybody	is	in	somebody
else's	place.	Everything	is	topsy-turvy,	it	is	a	chaos.	Without	meditation	you	will
never	 know	what	 exactly	 your	work	 here	 is.	As	 you	 enter	 into	meditation,	 as
thoughts	go	farther	and	farther	away	from	you,	as	you	create	a	distance	between
you	and	your	mind,	as	you	become	more	centred	and	settled,	peaceful,	at	ease
with	yourself,	a	clarity	arises.	You	can	see	clearly	that	this	is	the	thing	that	you
have	to	do.
It	 is	so	absolutely	clear	 that	 there	 is	no	doubt	about	 it,	no	question	about	 it.	 In
fact	one	is	surprised	how	one	has	remained	unaware	of	such	a	simple	fact	for	so
long.	And	once	 it	 is	known	your	 life	goes	 through	a	 radical	change.	Then	you
start	doing	 that	 for	which	you	are	meant.	Then	 the	 rose	becomes	 the	 rose,	 the
lotus	become	*sthe	lotus.
Right	now	the	rose	is	trying	to	be	the	lotus,	the	lotus	is	trying	to	be	the	rose.	The
rose	can	neither	be	a	rose	nor	can	the	lotus	be	a	lotus.	Everybody	is	trying	to	be
somebody	 else	 --	 and	 you	 can	 never	 be	 somebody	 else,	 you	 can	only	 be	 your
own	self.
Meditation	 is	 simply	 the	 method	 of	 discovering	 your	 source,	 your	 goal,	 your
purpose,	your	meaning,	your	significance.	and	once	you	have	started	doing	that,
that	is	worship,	that	is	prayer,	that	is	really	being	religious.	That	is	sannyas.
Meditation	is	a	process	of	rebirth,	a	process	of	spiritual	rebirth.	The	body	is	born
through	the	parents,	but	not	the	spirit;	the	spirit	needs	another	birth.	One	has	to
go	through	the	womb	of	meditation.	Nobody	else	can	do	it	for	you,	it	has	to	be
absolutely	a	self-discovery.
The	Buddhas	can	only	point	the	way,	the	masters	can	only	give	you	hints.	Then
it	is	for	you	to	travel.	It	is	a	long	pilgrimage.	It	is	because	we	have	gone	so	far
away	 from	 ourselves	 that	 coming	 back	 home	 is	 a	 long	 journey.	And	we	 have
forgotten	where	our	home	is.	We	have	forgotten	the	route.
Even	if	we	come	back	home	we	will	not	be	able	to	recognise	immediately	that
this	is	our	home.	Hence	the	master	is	needed	--	first	to	create	a	great	thirst	in	you
so	that	the	seeking	starts,	then	to	give	you	certain	hints.	I	call	them	hints	because
they	are	not	very	definite,	and	they	cannot	be	very	definite.	By	their	very	nature
they	 are	 vague,	 because	 the	 journey	 is	 a	 very	 mysterious	 journey.	 It	 is	 not
something	like	a	superhighway;	it	is	going	zig	zag	into	a	jungle,	no	path	exists.
As	you	move,	by	your	movement	you	create	the	path.	and	you	have	not	gone	to
your	inner	centre	for	so	long	that	thick	jungle	has	grown	all	around	it.
Then	finally	the	master	is	needed	when	you	have	reached	home	to	tell	you	that
this	is	it,	to	help	you	recognise	it,	to	help	you	remember	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Dhyan	means	meditation.	Jules	means	youthful,	youthfulness.
This	 is	 the	 literal	 meaning	 of	 Jules.	 There	 is	 also	 a	 symbolic	 meaning:	 the
youthful	heart.	It	is	significant.
Mind	is	always	old.	By	its	very	nature	it	cannot	be	young,	because	mind	simply
means	the	past,	and	how	can	the	past	be	young?	It	is	not	only	old,	it	is	dead	too.
It	is	just	a	corpse	which	we	are	carrying.
Mind	is	purely	a	memory	system,	a	biocomputer,	and	memory	by	its	very	nature
has	to	be	old;	otherwise	how	can	it	be	called	memory?	Something	has	happened,
something	has	been	experienced,	 something	has	been	 learned,	observed.	 It	has
been	recorded	--	that	record	is	the	mind.
The	heart	is	always	young	just	as	the	mind	is	always	old,	because	the	heart	lives
in	 the	 present;	 it	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the	 past	 and	 nothing	 of	 the	 future	 either,
because	future	is	only	an	extension	of	the	past;	it	is	modified	past.	It	cannot	be
otherwise.	Whatsoever	 you	 desire	 in	 the	 future	 is	 projected	 by	 the	mind,	 it	 is
projected	out	of	its	experiences.	Of	course	it	is	modified.	All	that	was	bad,	sad,
has	been	dropped	and	all	that	was	beautiful,	good,	has	been	magnified,	but	it	is
nothing	new.
The	past	is	old	and	the	future	is	the	child	of	the	past.	Only	the	present	is	always
new,	young,	fresh,	alive.
And	meditation	is	a	simple	process	of	shifting	your	energy	from	the	head	to	the
heart,	from	logic	to	love.	A	sannyasin	has	to	become	less	and	less	of	a	head	and
more	and	more	of	a	heart,	and	finally,	the	head	has	to	be	completely	chopped	off.
One	has	to	behead	oneself,	then	only	the	heart	functions	in	its	totality.	And	the
functioning	of	the	heart	in	its	totality	is	bliss,	is	truth,	is	life	eternal.
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	Truth
Chapter	title:	Bliss
Chapter	title:	Consciousness
Chapter	title:	Prayer
Chapter	title:	Music
Chapter	title:	Man's	Nature
Chapter	title:	Love
Chapter	title:
