
	
	
	
The	Chakra	Book
	
Energy	and	Healing	Power	of	the	Subtle	Body
	
	
OSHO
	
	
Copyright	©	1999,	2015	OSHO	International	Foundation
www.osho.com/copyrights
	
Images	and	cover	design	©	OSHO	International	Foundation
	
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	or	transmitted	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,
electronic	or	mechanical,	including	photocopying,	recording,	or	by	any	information	storage	and	retrieval
system,	without	prior	written	permission	from	the	publisher.
	
The	Chakra	Book	is	also	available	as	a	print	edition	ISBN	978-1-938755-95-8
	
The	text	excerpts	in	this	book	are	selected	from	various	talks	by	Osho,	given	to	a	live	audience.	All	of
Osho’s	talks	have	been	published	in	full	as	books,	and	are	also	available	as	original	audio	recordings.	Audio
recordings	and	the	complete	text	archive	can	be	found	via	the	online	OSHO	Library	at
www.osho.com/library
	
OSHO	is	a	registered	trademark	of	OSHO	International	Foundation
www.osho.com/trademarks
	
	
Published	by
OSHO	MEDIA	INTERNATIONAL
is	an	imprint	of
OSHO	INTERNATIONAL
New	York	–	Zurich	–	Mumbai
www.osho.com/oshointernational
	
	
Library	of	Congress	Catalog-In-Publication	Data	is	available
	
eBook	ISBN:	978-0-88050-994-7
	
Introduction
Osho,
Is	knowledge	about	esoteric	subjects	such	as	chakras,	collective	unconsciousness,	energy
fields,	really	helpful	along	the	way,	or	not?	Or	will	whatever	is	needed	come	to	me	through
experience,	in	its	own	time?
Anything	 that	 is	needed	will	 come	of	 its	own	accord,	 in	 its	own	 time.	All
this	so-called	esoteric	knowledge	about	chakras,	energy	fields,	kundalini,	astral
bodies,	 is	 dangerous	 as	 knowledge.	As	 an	 experience,	 it	 is	 a	 totally	 different
thing.	Don’t	acquire	it	as	knowledge.	If	it	is	needed	for	your	spiritual	growth,	it
will	come	to	you	in	its	right	time,	and	then	it	will	be	an	experience.
If	you	have	an	acquired	knowledge,	borrowed	knowledge,	it	is	going	to	be	a
hindrance.	For	example	Hindu	Yoga	believes	in	seven	chakras,	Jaina	scriptures
mention	 nine	 chakras,	 and	 Buddhist	 scriptures	 say	 that	 there	 are	 dozens	 of
chakras	and	that	these	are	only	the	important	ones	which	have	been	chosen	by
different	schools.	They	don’t	give	any	fixed	number.	Acquired	knowledge	will
be	 confusing:	 How	many	 chakras?	 And	what	 are	 you	 going	 to	 do	 with	 that
knowledge,	whether	there	are	seven	or	nine	or	dozens?	Your	knowledge	is	not
going	to	help;	it	can	only	hinder.
My	own	experience	is	that	perhaps	Buddha’s	experience	is	correct	–	and	that
does	not	make	the	Hindu	Yoga	or	Jaina	Yoga	incorrect.	Buddha	is	saying	that
there	 are	 energy	 fields,	whirling	 energy	 fields,	 from	 the	 lowest	 point	 in	 your
spine	 up	 to	 the	 very	 peak	 of	 your	 head.	 There	 are	 many;	 now	 it	 is	 only	 a
question	of	a	particular	teaching	which	ones	are	important	for	it.	That	particular
teaching	 will	 choose	 those.	 Hindus	 have	 chosen	 seven,	 Jainas	 have	 chosen
nine.	 They	 don’t	 contradict	 each	 other,	 it	 is	 simply	 that	 the	 emphasis	 is	 on
whatever	chakra	the	teaching	feels	to	emphasize.
As	far	as	I	am	concerned,	you	will	come	across	only	four	chakras	which	are
the	most	important.
One	you	know	 is	 your	 sex	 center.	The	 second,	 just	 above	 it,	which	 is	 not
recognized	 in	any	 Indian	school	of	 thought	but	has	been	 recognized	 in	 Japan
alone,	is	called	the	hara.	It	is	between	your	navel	and	the	sex	center.	The	hara	is
the	death	chakra.
My	own	experience	is	that	life,	that	is	the	sex	center,	and	death,	that	is	the
hara,	should	be	very	close,	and	they	are.
In	Japan,	when	somebody	commits	suicide,	it	is	called	hara-kiri.	Nowhere	in
the	 world	 does	 such	 a	 thing	 happen	 except	 in	 Japan.	 Suicide	 is	 committed
everywhere,	 but	with	 a	 knife?	 Just	 two	 inches	below	 the	navel,	 the	 Japanese
forces	a	knife	–	and	this	is	the	most	miraculous	death;	no	blood,	no	pain	–	and
death	is	instantaneous.
So	the	first	chakra	is	the	life	chakra;	it	is	a	whirling	energy.	Chakra	means
wheel,	moving.	Just	above	the	life	chakra	is	the	death	chakra.
The	 third	 important	 chakra	 is	 the	 heart	 chakra.	 You	 can	 call	 it	 the	 love
chakra,	 because	 between	 life	 and	 death	 the	 most	 important	 thing	 that	 can
happen	 to	 a	man	or	 to	 a	woman	 is	 love.	And	 love	 has	many	manifestations:
meditation	 is	 one	 of	 the	 manifestations	 of	 love,	 prayer	 is	 one	 of	 the
manifestations	of	love.	This	is	the	third	important	chakra.
The	fourth	important	chakra	is	what	Hindu	Yoga	calls	the	agna	chakra	–	just
on	 your	 forehead	 between	 the	 two	 eyes.	 These	 four	 chakras	 are	 the	 most
important.
The	fourth	is	from	where	your	energy	moves	beyond	humanity	into	divinity.
There	is	one	more	chakra,	which	is	at	 the	top	part	of	your	head,	but	you	will
not	come	across	it	in	your	life	journey.	That’s	why	I	am	not	counting	it.	After
the	 fourth,	you	have	 transcended	 the	body,	 the	mind,	 the	heart,	all	 that	 is	not
you	–	only	your	being	remains.	And	when	death	happens	to	such	a	person…
That’s	why	 in	 India	 the	 hara	 has	 not	 been	 taken	 note	 of;	 in	 the	Hindu	 or
Jaina	or	Buddhist	Yoga,	they	were	not	considering	people	who	commit	suicide.
They	were	thinking	about	people	who	were	transforming	their	energy	from	the
physical	to	the	immaterial.
So	the	fifth	chakra	is	the	sahasrar.	The	Jainas	count	it,	the	Hindus	count	it	–
because	a	person	who	dies	after	 transcending	the	fourth	chakra…	His	energy,
his	being	leaves	the	body,	cracking	the	skull	into	two	parts;	that	is	the	sahasrar
chakra,	but	because	it	is	not	part	of	your	life	experience,	I	am	not	counting	it.
The	 four	 are	 your	 life	 experience.	 This	 one	 is	 the	 death	 of	 a	 person	who	 is
enlightened.	He	does	not	die	from	the	hara.
That’s	 why	 in	 India	 no	 school	 has	 taken	 note	 of	 the	 hara	 chakra.	 But	 in
Japan	 they	 had	 to	 take	 note	 of	 it,	 because	 in	 Japan	 suicide	 was	 a	 form	 of
etiquette.
You	will	be	puzzled:	the	Japanese	have	such	a	totally	different	culture	from
the	whole	world;	from	small	things	to	big	things,	they	have	their	own	approach.
I	 am	 reminded	 of	 one	 incident.	 A	 Japanese	 can	 commit	 suicide	 for	 small
things	 because	 he	 cannot	 live	 a	 life	 of	 shame.	 If	 he	 feels	 ashamed,	 that	 is
enough	to	finish	his	life	–	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	conceive	of	what	small
things	are	thought	so	important	that	life	is	nothing.
	
A	master,	who	was	the	greatest	archer	of	Japan,	was	called	by	the	king.	The
king	wanted	his	son	to	become	as	great	an	archer	as	the	master.
Now,	 it	 is	Japanese	etiquette	 that	even	when	two	people	are	going	 to	fight
with	each	other,	first	 they	will	bow	down	to	each	other’s	divinity	with	folded
hands,	even	though	they	are	going	to	kill.	Before	killing,	they	will	respect	each
other.	 So	 in	 ordinary	 life	 in	 Japan,	 you	will	 find	 people	 everywhere	 bowing
down	to	each	other	–	on	the	road,	in	the	restaurants.	It	 is	disappearing,	as	the
modern	Western	influence	is	changing	the	whole	world.
But	 the	master	archer	was	such	an	egoist	 that	even	 in	 front	of	 the	king	he
waited:	first	the	king	should	fold	his	hands,	and	then…
The	king’s	court	condemned	the	man	and	said,	“You	have	committed	such	a
shameful	act.	Just	go	back	and	commit	hara-kiri.”	It	was	not	such	a	big	thing,
but	when	the	whole	court	had	said	it,	the	whole	country	would	know	about	it.
The	man	went	directly	to	his	home	and	committed	hara-kiri.
He	 had	 three	 hundred	 students.	 When	 they	 heard	 that	 their	 master	 had
committed	 a	 shameful	 act,	 all	 three	 hundred	 students	 committed	 hara-kiri
because	it	was	so	shameful	that	their	master	should	have	behaved	like	this.
	
Now	this	cannot	happen	anywhere	else	in	the	world.	If	the	master	had	done
something	shameful	–	although	it	was	not	much	of	a	shameful	act,	but	even	if	it
were,	 the	 students	 were	 completely	 innocent.	 But	 because	 they	 were	 the
students	of	that	master,	it	was	enough	to	feel	ashamed	–	they	had	followed	such
a	man.
People	 have	 been	 committing	 hara-kiri	 in	 Japan	 for	 centuries.	 So	 when
Buddhism	 reached	 there	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 about	 fourteen	hundred	years	ago,
and	 they	 started	 meditating,	 they	 were	 the	 first	 people	 to	 discover	 the	 hara
center	 –	 because	 they	 had	 been	 using	 that	 center	 for	 centuries,	 so	 it	 was
throbbing	and	vibrating	and	alive.
It	 all	 depends.	 In	 different	 cultures	 it	 may	 be	 a	 little	 different	 where	 the
center	is.
For	example	when	Japanese	started	coming	to	me	for	sannyas,	I	was	a	little
bit	puzzled	–	because	all	over	the	whole	world	when	you	want	to	say	yes,	you
move	your	head	up	and	down.	And	the	Japanese,	when	they	want	to	say	yes,
move	the	head	from	side	to	side	–	which	means	no.	All	over	the	world,	that	is
the	 sign	 for	 no	 –	 but	 that	 is	 their	 sign	 for	 yes,	 and	 the	 head	moving	 up	 and
down	is	their	sign	for	no.
So	when	I	would	ask	them	something	I	would	be	very	puzzled;	I	could	not
believe	that	they	had	come	to	take	sannyas.	They	were	sitting	before	me	and	I
was	asking,	“Are	you	 ready	 for	 sannyas?”	and	 they	would	shake	 their	heads.
“Then	why	have	you	come?	You	have	unnecessarily	traveled	here	from	Japan
and	you	are	sitting	here	in	front	of	me	just	for	that	purpose,	and	you	are	saying
no?”
Then	my	interpreter	said	to	me,	“You	don’t	understand;	that	person	is	saying
yes.	 In	 Japan,	 the	head	moving	 from	side	 to	 side	 is	yes;	 the	head	moving	up
and	down	 is	no.”	So	you	have	 to	 remember	 it	when	you	are	 talking	with	 the
Japanese.	 Otherwise	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 great	 confusion	 –	 you	 will	 say
something,	 they	will	 understand	 something	 else.	They	 cannot	 speak	 but	 they
can	understand.
In	 the	Caucasus,	where	Gurdjieff	was	born,	 they	have	a	system	of	chakras
which	is	slightly	different.	It	seems	to	be	the	difference	between	the	people	of
the	Caucasus	and	other	people.
In	India,	three	religions,	Hinduism,	Jainism	and	Buddhism,	all	have	exactly
the	 same	 points.	 They	 may	 count	 five	 or	 seven	 or	 nine,	 but	 the	 places	 are
exactly	the	same.	The	centuries	have	affected	their	bodies	in	a	different	way.
In	the	Caucasus,	there	are	thousands	of	people	who	are	older	than	a	hundred
and	fifty	years.	The	Caucasus	is	the	place	with	the	oldest	people	in	the	whole
world	–	and	they	are	not	old;	at	the	age	of	one	hundred	and	eighty,	a	person	is
still	young.	He	is	working	on	the	farm	just	like	any	young	man.
In	the	Caucasus,	people	always	die	while	very	young;	they	don’t	grow	old.
Naturally	 their	 bodies	 have	 developed	 in	 a	 different	 way.	 Their	 food	 has
something	to	do	with	it,	the	climate,	the	geography,	their	land.	It	has	created	a
different	psychology.
Throughout	the	whole	world,	it	is	thought	that	seventy	years	is	the	time	for
everybody	 to	 die	 –	 that	 is	 the	 average;	 you	 can	 be	 five	 years	 earlier	 or	 five
years	later,	but	the	average	is	seventy.
	
When	George	Bernard	Shaw	became	seventy,	he	started	looking	in	the	small
villages	around	London	at	the	gravestones	in	their	cemeteries,	to	see	how	long
people	 in	 that	village	had	 lived.	His	 friend	said,	“You	are	mad.	Why	are	you
wasting	your	time?”
He	 said,	 “I	 don’t	 want	 to	 die	 at	 seventy.	 I	 have	 never	 been	 average	 in
anything,	and	I	cannot	be	average	in	death.	So	I	am	looking	for	a	place	where
people	don’t	believe	that	seventy	is	the	average	age	to	die,	because	that	place
will	have	a	psychology	of	its	own.”
Finally	he	found	a	village	where,	on	many	stones	in	the	graveyard,	he	found
that	 it	 was	 written:	 This	 man	 lived	 one	 hundred	 and	 eight	 years,	 and	 died
untimely.
He	said,	“This	is	the	right	place	–	where	a	man	lives	one	hundred	and	eight
years	and	still	people	 think	the	poor	fellow	has	died	untimely,	 that	 it	was	not
yet	time	to	die.”
After	seventy	years	he	moved	from	London	–	he	had	lived	there	for	seventy
years	–	to	a	village,	after	checking	the	cemetery.	And	he	lived	a	hundred	years.
He	 proved	 that	 village	 had	 the	 psychology,	 that	 village	 had	 the	 vibe,	 that
village	had	the	idea	that	one	hundred	years	is	nothing.
When	he	would	ask	people	if	he	could	live	to	one	hundred,	they	would	say,
“One	hundred	 is	nothing;	everybody	 lives	 to	one	hundred.	You	can	go	 to	 the
cemetery	and	see	–	one	hundred	and	forty,	one	hundred	and	thirty;	people	live
that	long	very	easily.	A	hundred?	–	that	is	too	early.”
He	lived	one	hundred	years.
	
Certainly	he	proved	one	fact:	 that	your	psychology,	your	mind,	your	body,
are	impressed	by	the	vibrations	in	which	you	live.
So	you	will	come	to	experience	chakras,	you	will	come	to	experience	energy
fields,	 but	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	 be	 knowledgeable	 because	 that	 is	 a	 difficult
problem.	You	may	 read	 a	 book	written	 five	 thousand	 years	 ago	 by	 a	 certain
kind	of	person	and	you	may	not	be	of	the	same	category.	You	may	not	find	that
chakra	at	 the	same	place,	and	you	will	feel	unnecessarily	frustrated.	And	you
will	 find	a	chakra	 in	a	place	where	 the	books	don’t	mention	 it;	 then	you	will
feel	 that	 you	 are	 abnormal,	 something	 is	wrong	with	 you.	Nothing	 is	wrong
with	you.
Energy	 fields,	 chakras,	 and	 all	 the	 esoteric	 things	 should	 be	 experienced.
And	 keep	 your	 mind	 clean	 of	 all	 knowledge	 so	 that	 you	 don’t	 have	 any
expectation;	wherever	the	experience	happens,	you	are	ready	to	accept	it.
Each	individual	has	differences,	and	differences	come	in	such	small	 things
that	you	cannot	conceive.	For	example,	in	the	East,	people	sit	on	the	floor.	In
cold	countries,	people	cannot	sit	on	 the	 floor;	a	chair	 is	absolutely	necessary.
Naturally	their	backbones,	their	spines	will	have	a	different	shape	than	those	of
the	people	who	sit	on	the	floor,	and	their	experiences	of	their	kundalini	will	be
different.
There	are	people	who	eat	only	once	a	day.	For	thousands	of	years	they	have
never	 eaten	more	 often	 than	 that.	 In	 South	Africa	 there	 are	 tribes	which	 eat
only	 once	 in	 twenty-four	 hours.	 When	 they	 came	 across	 American
missionaries,	there	was	such	laughter.	“These	idiots	are	eating	five	times	a	day!
Breakfast	 –	 there	 is	 no	 fast	 at	 all	 and	 they	 are	 having	 ‘break-fast.’	 And	 the
whole	day,	something	or	other;	and	then	coffee	break,	and	tea	break,	and	they
go	on…	And	 in	between	 they	are	 chewing	gum.	These	people	have	 come	 to
teach	us	religion	and	they	are	simply	mad!”
In	a	way	they	are	right,	because	they	have	beautiful	bodies,	they	live	longer,
their	bodies	are	not	fat.	Their	bodies	are	like	a	deer’s;	they	can	run	like	deer	–
they	 have	 to	 because	 they	 are	 hunters.	 Their	 eyes	 are	 very	 clear,	 very
perceptive;	their	bodies	are	very	proportionate.
Now	 these	 people	 will	 have	 a	 totally	 different	 experience	 of	 their
physiology.	 The	meat	 eaters	 and	 the	 vegetarians	will	 find	 differences	 to	 one
another.
So	 it	 is	 better	 not	 to	 memorize	 from	 scriptures.	 Those	 scriptures	 are	 the
experiences	of	certain	people,	of	certain	 times,	of	certain	circumstances;	 they
were	not	written	for	you.
The	 scripture	 that	 is	 for	 you	 can	 be	 written	 only	 by	 you,	 by	 your	 own
experience.
	
PART	I:	THE	SEVEN	CENTERS	OF	BEING
	
Chapter	1:	The	Changing	Seasons	of	Life
	
Life	 has	 an	 inner	 pattern;	 it	 is	 good	 to	 understand	 it.	 Every	 seven	 years,
physiologists	say,	the	body	and	mind	go	through	a	crisis	and	a	change.	Every
seven	years	all	the	cells	of	the	body	change,	are	completely	renewed.	In	fact,	if
you	 live	 seventy	 years,	 the	 average	 limit,	 your	 body	 dies	 ten	 times.	 Each
seventh	 year	 everything	 changes.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 changing	 seasons.	 In	 seventy
years,	 the	circle	 is	 complete.	The	 line	 that	moves	 from	birth	comes	 to	death.
The	circle	is	complete	in	seventy	years.	It	has	ten	divisions.
In	fact,	man’s	life	should	not	be	divided	into	childhood,	youth,	old	age	–	that
is	not	very	scientific	because	every	seven	years	a	new	age,	a	new	step	is	taken.
For	the	first	seven	years	a	child	is	self-centered,	as	if	he	is	the	center	of	the
whole	world.	 The	whole	 family	moves	 around	 him.	Whatever	 his	 needs	 are,
they	are	to	be	fulfilled	immediately,	otherwise	he	will	go	into	a	tantrum:	anger,
rage…	He	lives	like	an	emperor,	a	real	emperor.	His	mother,	his	father	–	all	are
servants,	and	the	whole	family	just	exists	for	him.	And	of	course	he	thinks	the
same	is	true	for	the	wider	world.	The	moon	rises	for	him,	the	sun	rises	for	him,
the	seasons	change	for	him.	A	child	remains	absolutely	egoistic,	self-centered
for	 seven	 years.	 If	 you	 ask	 psychologists	 they	 will	 say	 a	 child	 remains
masturbatory	 for	 seven	 years,	 satisfied	 with	 himself.	 He	 does	 not	 need
anything,	anybody.	He	feels	complete.
After	seven	years	–	a	breakthrough.	The	child	is	no	longer	self-centered;	he
becomes	 eccentric,	 literally.	 Eccentric	 –	 the	 word	 means	 going	 out	 of	 the
center.	He	moves	toward	others.	The	other	becomes	the	important	phenomenon
–	friends,	gangs…	Now	he	is	not	so	interested	in	himself;	he	is	interested	in	the
other,	 the	bigger	world.	He	enters	 an	adventure	 to	know	who	 this	 “other”	 Is.
Inquiry	starts.
After	 the	 seventh	year,	 the	child	becomes	a	great	questioner.	He	questions
everything.	 He	 becomes	 a	 great	 skeptic	 because	 inquiry	 is	 there;	 he	 asks
millions	of	questions.	He	bores	the	parents	to	death,	he	becomes	a	nuisance.	He
is	interested	in	the	other,	and	everything	of	the	world	is	of	interest.	Why	are	the
trees	 green?	 Why	 did	 God	 create	 the	 world?	 Why	 is	 this	 so?	 He	 starts
becoming	 more	 philosophic;	 inquiry,	 skepticism	 –	 he	 insists	 on	 going	 into
things.
He	kills	 a	butterfly	 to	 see	what	 is	 inside,	destroys	a	 toy	 just	 to	 see	how	 it
works,	throws	a	clock	just	to	look	into	it,	how	it	goes	on	ticking	and	chiming	–
what	 is	 the	matter	 inside?	He	 becomes	 interested	 in	 the	 other,	 but	 the	 other
remains	 of	 the	 same	 sex.	 He	 is	 not	 interested	 in	 girls.	 If	 other	 boys	 are
interested	in	girls,	he	will	think	they	are	sissy.	Girls	are	not	interested	in	boys.
If	 some	 girl	 is	 interested	 in	 boys	 and	 plays	with	 them,	 she	 is	 a	 tomboy,	 not
normal,	 average;	 something	 is	wrong.	 Psychoanalysts	 and	 psychologists	will
say	this	second	stage	is	homosexual.
After	 the	fourteenth	year,	a	 third	door	opens.	He	 is	no	 longer	 interested	 in
boys,	girls	are	no	longer	interested	in	girls.	They	are	polite,	but	not	interested.
That’s	 why	 any	 friendship	 that	 happens	 between	 the	 seventh	 year	 and	 the
fourteenth	is	the	deepest,	because	the	mind	is	homosexual,	and	no	longer	in	life
will	such	friendship	happen	again.	Those	friends	remain	friends	forever;	it	was
such	 a	 deep	 tie.	 You	 will	 become	 friendly	 with	 people	 but	 it	 will	 remain
acquaintance,	 not	 that	 deep	 phenomenon	 that	 happened	 between	 the	 seventh
and	the	fourteenth	year.
After	the	fourteenth	year,	a	boy	is	not	interested	in	boys.	If	everything	goes
normal,	if	he	is	not	stuck	somewhere,	he	will	be	interested	in	girls.	Now	he	is
becoming	heterosexual	–	not	only	interested	in	the	others,	but	really	the	other,
because	when	a	boy	is	interested	in	boys,	the	boy	may	be	other	but	he	is	still	a
boy	just	like	himself,	not	exactly	the	other.	When	a	boy	becomes	interested	in	a
girl,	 now	 he	 is	 really	 interested	 in	 the	 opposite,	 the	 real	 other.	When	 a	 girl
becomes	interested	in	a	boy,	now	the	world	enters.
The	fourteenth	year	is	a	great	revolutionary	year.	Sex	becomes	mature,	one
starts	thinking	in	terms	of	sex,	sex	fantasies	become	prominent	in	the	dreams.
The	boy	becomes	a	great	Don	Juan,	starts	courting.	Poetry	arises,	romance.	He
is	entering	the	world.
By	 the	 twenty-first	 year	 –	 if	 everything	 goes	 normally,	 and	 a	 child	 is	 not
forced	by	the	society	to	do	something	which	is	not	natural	–	by	the	twenty-first
year,	 a	 child	 becomes	 interested	more	 in	 ambition	 than	 in	 love.	 He	wants	 a
Rolls	Royce,	a	great	palace.	He	wants	to	be	a	success,	a	Rockefeller,	a	prime
minister.	Ambitions	become	prominent:	desiring	for	the	future,	being	a	success.
How	 to	 succeed,	 how	 to	 compete,	 how	 to	move	 in	 the	 struggle	 is	 his	whole
concern.
Now	he	is	not	only	entering	the	world	of	nature,	he	is	entering	the	world	of
humanity,	the	marketplace.	Now	he	is	entering	the	world	of	madness.	Now	the
market	 becomes	 the	most	 prominent	 thing.	His	whole	 being	goes	 toward	 the
market:	money,	power,	prestige.
If	 everything	 goes	 right	 –	 as	 it	 never	 goes,	 I	 am	 talking	 of	 the	 absolutely
natural	 phenomenon	 –	 by	 the	 twenty-eighth	 year,	 a	 man	 is	 not	 in	 any	 way
trying	to	enter	an	adventurous	life.	From	twenty-one	to	twenty-eight,	one	lives
in	 adventure;	 by	 the	 twenty-eighth	 year,	 one	 becomes	more	 alert	 that	 not	 all
desires	 can	 be	 fulfilled.	 There	 is	 more	 understanding	 that	 many	 desires	 are
impossible.	 If	 you	 are	 a	 fool,	 you	 can	 go	 after	 them.	 But	 people	 who	 are
intelligent,	 by	 the	 twenty-eighth	 year	 enter	 another	 door.	 They	 become	more
interested	 in	 security	and	comfort,	 less	 in	adventure	and	ambition.	They	start
settling.	The	twenty-eighth	year	is	the	end	of	hippiedom.
At	 twenty-eight,	 hippies	 become	 squares,	 revolutionaries	 are	 no	 longer
revolutionaries;	 they	 start	 settling,	 they	 seek	 a	 comfortable	 life,	 a	 little	 bank
balance.	They	don’t	want	 to	 be	Rockefellers;	 finished,	 that	 urge	 is	 no	 longer
there.	They	want	a	small	house,	but	established,	a	cozy	place	to	live	in,	security
–	so	at	least	this	much	they	can	always	have;	a	small	bank	balance.	They	go	to
the	 insurance	company	nearabout	 the	age	of	 twenty-eight.	They	start	settling.
Now	 the	 vagabond	 is	 no	 longer	 the	 vagabond.	 He	 purchases	 a	 house,	 starts
living…he	becomes	civilized.	The	word	civilization	comes	from	the	word	civis,
citizen.	 Now	 he	 becomes	 part	 of	 a	 town,	 a	 city,	 an	 establishment.	 He	 is	 no
longer	a	vagabond,	a	wanderer.	Now	he	is	not	going	to	Kathmandu	and	Goa.
He	is	not	going	anywhere	–	finished,	traveled	enough,	known	enough;	now	he
wants	to	settle	and	rest	a	little.
By	the	thirty-fifth	year,	life	energy	reaches	its	omega	point.	The	circle	is	half
complete	 and	 energies	 start	 declining.	Now	 the	man	 is	 not	 only	 interested	 in
security	 and	 comfort,	 he	 becomes	 a	 Tory,	 orthodox.	 He	 becomes	 not	 only
disinterested	in	revolution,	he	becomes	an	antirevolutionary.	Now	he	is	against
all	change.	He	is	a	conformist.	He	is	against	all	revolution;	he	wants	the	status
quo	because	now	he	has	settled	and	if	anything	changes,	the	whole	thing	will
unsettle.	Now	he	is	talking	against	hippies,	against	rebels;	now	he	has	become
really	a	part	of	the	establishment.
And	 this	 is	 natural.	 Unless	 something	 goes	wrong,	 a	man	 is	 not	 going	 to
remain	a	hippie	forever.	That	was	a	phase,	good	to	pass	through,	but	bad	to	be
stuck	 in.	 That	means	 you	 remain	 stuck	 at	 a	 certain	 stage.	 It	was	 good	 to	 be
homosexual	between	seven	and	fourteen,	but	if	one	remains	homosexual	for	his
whole	life,	that	means	he	has	not	grown	up,	he	is	not	adult.	A	woman	has	to	be
contacted,	 that	 is	part	of	 life.	The	other	sex	has	 to	become	important	because
only	then	will	you	be	able	to	know	the	harmony	of	the	opposites,	the	conflict,
the	 misery,	 and	 the	 ecstasy:	 agony	 and	 ecstasy	 both.	 That	 is	 a	 training,	 a
necessary	training.
By	the	thirty-fifth	year,	one	has	become	part	of	the	conventional	world.	One
starts	believing	in	tradition,	in	the	past,	in	the	Vedas,	the	Koran,	The	Bible.	One
is	absolutely	against	change	because	every	change	means	your	own	life	will	be
disturbed;	 now	 you	 have	much	 to	 lose.	 You	 cannot	 be	 for	 revolution	 –	 you
want	to	protect…	One	is	for	the	law	and	the	courts	and	the	government.	One	is
no	 longer	 an	 anarchist;	 one	 is	 all	 for	 the	 government,	 rules,	 regulations,
discipline.
By	 the	 forty-second	 year,	 all	 sorts	 of	 physical	 and	 mental	 illnesses	 erupt
because	now	life	is	declining.	Energy	is	moving	toward	death.
Just	as	 in	 the	beginning	energies	were	coming	up	and	you	were	becoming
more	 and	more	 vital,	 energetic,	 you	were	 becoming	 stronger	 and	 stronger	 –
now	just	the	opposite	happens,	you	become	weaker	every	day.
But	your	habits	persist.	You	have	been	eating	enough	up	to	the	age	of	thirty-
five;	now	you	continue	your	habit.	You	will	start	gathering	fat.	Now	that	much
food	 is	 not	 needed.	 It	 was	 needed	 but	 now	 it	 is	 not	 needed	 because	 life	 is
moving	toward	death,	it	does	not	need	that	much	food.	If	you	go	on	filling	your
belly	as	you	were	doing	before,	all	 sorts	of	 illnesses	will	happen:	high	blood
pressure,	heart	attack,	insomnia,	ulcers	–	they	all	happen	nearabout	forty-two.
Forty-two	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 dangerous	 points.	 The	 hair	 starts	 falling	 out,
becoming	gray.	Life	is	turning	into	death.
And	 near	 the	 age	 of	 forty-two,	 religion	 starts	 becoming	 important	 for	 the
first	time.	You	may	have	dabbled	a	little	here	and	there	in	religion	before,	but
now	religion	becomes	important	for	the	first	time	–	because	religion	is	deeply
concerned	 with	 death.	 Now	 death	 is	 approaching	 and	 the	 first	 desire	 for
religion	arises.
Carl	Gustav	Jung	has	written	that	his	whole	life	he	has	been	observing	that
the	people	who	come	to	him	at	the	age	of	forty	or	nearabout	are	always	in	need
of	 religion.	 If	 they	go	mad,	neurotic,	psychotic,	 they	cannot	be	helped	unless
they	become	rooted	in	religion.	They	need	religion;	their	basic	need	is	religion.
And	 if	 the	 society	 is	 secular	 and	 you	 have	 never	 been	 taught	 religion,	 the
greatest	difficulty	comes	nearabout	the	age	of	forty-two	–	because	society	does
not	give	you	any	avenue,	any	door,	any	dimension.
Society	was	good	when	you	were	fourteen,	because	it	gives	enough	of	sex	–
the	 whole	 society	 is	 sexual;	 sex	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 only	 commodity	 hidden	 in
every	commodity.	If	you	want	to	sell	a	ten-ton	truck,	you	have	to	use	a	naked
woman,	or	toothpaste	–	then	too.	Truck	or	toothpaste,	it	makes	no	difference:	a
naked	woman	 is	always	smiling	 there	behind.	Really	 the	woman	 is	 sold.	The
truck	is	not	sold,	the	toothpaste	is	not	sold;	the	woman	is	sold.	And	because	the
woman	is	there	–	her	smile	comes	with	the	toothpaste	–	you	have	to	purchase
the	toothpaste.	Everywhere	sex	is	sold.
So	this	society,	a	secular	society,	is	good	for	young	people.	But	they	are	not
going	 to	 remain	 young	 forever.	 When	 they	 become	 forty-two	 suddenly	 the
society	 leaves	 them	 in	 limbo.	 They	 don’t	 know	 what	 to	 do	 now.	 They	 go
neurotic	because	they	don’t	know,	they	have	never	been	trained,	no	discipline
has	been	given	them	to	face	death.	The	society	has	made	them	ready	for	 life,
but	 nobody	 has	 taught	 them	 to	 become	 ready	 for	 death.	 They	 need	 as	much
education	for	death	as	they	need	for	life.
If	I	was	allowed	my	way,	I	would	divide	universities	into	two	parts:	one	for
young	people,	another	for	old	people.	Young	people	would	come	to	 learn	 the
art	of	 life	–	sex,	ambition,	struggle.	Then	when	they	became	old	and	reached
the	 forty-two	 mark,	 they	 would	 come	 back	 to	 the	 university	 to	 learn	 about
death,	God,	meditation	–	because	then	the	old	universities	wouldn’t	be	of	any
help	 to	 them.	 They	 need	 a	 new	 training,	 a	 new	 discipline,	 so	 that	 they	 can
become	anchored	with	the	new	phase	that	is	happening	to	them.
This	society	leaves	them	in	limbo;	that’s	why	in	the	West	there	is	so	much
mental	illness.	It	is	not	so	much	in	the	East.	Why?	–	because	the	East	still	gives
a	little	training	in	religion.	It	has	not	disappeared	completely;	howsoever	false,
pseudo,	 it	 is	 still	 there,	 it	 exists,	 just	 around	 the	 corner.	 No	 longer	 in	 the
marketplace,	no	longer	in	the	thick	of	life,	just	at	the	side,	but	there	is	a	temple.
Out	of	the	way	of	life,	but	still	it	is	there.	You	have	to	walk	a	few	steps	and	you
can	go	there.	It	still	exists.
In	the	West	religion	is	no	longer	part	of	life.	Nearabout	the	age	of	forty-two,
every	 Westerner	 is	 going	 through	 psychic	 problems.	 Thousands	 of	 types	 of
neuroses	 happen	 –	 and	 ulcers.	 Ulcers	 are	 the	 footprints	 of	 ambition.	 An
ambitious	man	 is	bound	 to	have	ulcers	 in	 the	stomach:	ambition	bites,	 it	eats
itself.	An	ulcer	 is	nothing	but	eating	yourself.	You	are	so	tense	that	you	have
started	eating	your	own	stomach	 lining.	You	are	so	 tense,	your	stomach	 is	so
tense,	it	never	relaxes.	Whenever	the	mind	is	tense,	the	stomach	is	tense.	Ulcers
are	 the	 footprints	 of	 ambition.	 If	 you	have	 ulcers,	 that	 shows	you	 are	 a	 very
successful	man.
If	you	have	no	ulcers,	you	are	a	poor	man:	your	life	has	been	a	failure,	you
failed	utterly.	If	you	have	your	first	heart	attack	nearabout	forty-two,	you	are	a
great	success:	you	must	be	at	least	a	cabinet	minister,	or	a	rich	industrialist,	or	a
famous	actor;	otherwise,	how	will	you	explain	the	heart	attack?	A	heart	attack
is	the	definition	of	success.	All	successful	people	will	have	heart	attacks.	They
have	to.
The	whole	system	is	burdened	with	toxic	elements:	ambition,	desire,	future,
tomorrow	 –	 which	 are	 never	 there.	 You	 lived	 in	 dreams.	 Now	 your	 system
cannot	tolerate	it	anymore.	You	remain	so	tense	for	the	future	that	tension	has
become	your	very	style	of	life.	Now	it	is	a	deep-rooted	habit.
At	 forty-two,	 again	 a	 breakthrough	 comes.	 One	 starts	 thinking	 about
religion,	 the	other	world.	Then	 life	seems	 to	be	very	short.	Little	 time	 is	 left.
How	 can	 you	 achieve	 God,	 nirvana,	 enlightenment?	 Hence	 the	 theory	 of
reincarnation:	don’t	be	afraid,	again	you	will	be	born,	again	and	again,	and	the
wheel	of	life	will	go	on	moving	and	moving.	Don’t	be	afraid:	there	is	enough
time,	there	is	enough	eternity	left	–	you	can	attain.
That’s	 why	 in	 India	 three	 religions	 were	 born	 –	 Jainism,	 Buddhism	 and
Hinduism	–	and	they	don’t	agree	on	any	other	point	except	reincarnation.	They
don’t	 agree	on	any	other	point.	Even	about	 such	an	 important	 theory	as	God
there	is	not	an	agreement.	Jainas	say	there	is	no	God,	Buddhists	say	there	is	no
God.	 Even	 about	 a	more	 important	 theory	 than	God,	 the	 theory	 of	 the	 soul,
atman–	Buddhists	say	there	is	no	atman,	no	soul.	Such	divergent	theories!	Not
even	agreeing	on	the	basic	foundations:	God,	self…	But	they	all	agree	on	the
theory	of	reincarnation.	There	must	be	something	to	it.
They	all	need	time,	because	to	attain	brahman	–	Hindus	call	 it	brahman	–
much	time	is	needed.	It	 is	such	a	great	ambition,	and	at	 the	age	of	forty-two,
you	become	interested.	Only	twenty-eight	years	are	left.
And	this	is	just	the	beginning	of	the	interest.	In	fact,	at	the	age	of	forty-two,
you	become	again	a	child	in	the	world	of	religion.	Only	twenty-eight	years	are
left.	 Time	 seems	 too	 short,	 not	 enough	 at	 all	 to	 attain	 such	 great	 heights	 –
brahman,	Hindus	call	it.	Jainas	call	it	moksha,	absolute	freedom	from	all	past
karmas.	Thousands	and	millions	of	lives	have	been	there	in	the	past;	how	are
you	 going	 to	 cope	within	 twenty-eight	 years?	How	will	 you	 undo	 the	whole
past?	Such	a	vast	past	is	there	–	bad	and	good	karmas.	How	are	you	going	to
clean	your	sins	completely	within	twenty-eight	years?	It	seems	unjust.	God	is
demanding	too	much,	it	is	not	possible.	You	will	feel	frustrated	if	only	twenty-
eight	years	are	given	to	you.
And	Buddhists	–	who	don’t	believe	in	God,	don’t	believe	in	the	soul	–	also
believe	in	reincarnation,	nirvana,	the	final	emptiness,	the	total	emptiness.	When
you	have	remained	filled	with	so	much	rubbish	for	so	many	lives,	how	are	you
going	 to	 unburden	 within	 twenty-eight	 years?	 It	 is	 too	 much,	 seems	 an
impossible	task.	They	all	agree	on	one	thing,	that	more	future	is	needed,	more
time	is	needed.
Whenever	you	have	ambition,	time	is	needed.	And	to	me,	a	religious	person
is	one	who	does	not	need	 time.	He	 is	 liberated	here	and	now,	he	achieves	 to
brahman	 here	 and	 now,	 he	 is	mukta,	 liberated,	 enlightened	 here	 and	 now.	A
religious	man	does	not	need	time	at	all	because	religion	happens	in	a	timeless
moment.	 It	 happens	 now,	 it	 always	 happens	 now.	 It	 has	 never	 happened
otherwise,	in	no	other	way	has	it	ever	happened.
At	the	age	of	forty-two,	the	first	urge	arises,	vague,	not	clear,	confused.	You
are	not	even	aware	of	what	 is	happening,	but	you	start	 looking	at	 the	 temple
with	keen	interest.	Sometimes,	by	the	way,	as	a	casual	visitor,	you	come	to	the
church	also.	Sometimes,	having	time,	not	doing	anything,	you	start	looking	in
The	 Bible	 which	 has	 always	 been	 gathering	 dust	 on	 the	 table.	 Vague,	 not
exactly	 clear,	 just	 like	 the	 small	 child	who	 is	 vague	 about	 sex	 starts	 playing
with	 his	 own	 sex	 organ,	 not	 knowing	 what	 he	 is	 doing.	 A	 vague	 urge…
Sometimes	one	sits	alone	silently,	suddenly	feels	peaceful,	not	knowing	what
he	 is	 doing.	 Sometimes	 one	 starts	 a	mantra	 heard	 in	 the	 childhood.	 The	 old
grandmother	 used	 to	 do	 it;	 feeling	 tense,	 one	 starts	 repeating	 it.	 One	 starts
seeking,	 searching	 for	 a	 guru,	 somebody	 to	 guide	 you.	 One	 takes	 initiation,
starts	learning	a	mantra,	repeating	it	sometimes,	then	again	forgetting	for	a	few
days,	again	repeating…	A	vague	search,	groping…
By	 the	 forty-ninth	year,	 the	 search	becomes	 clear;	 seven	years	 it	 takes	 for
the	 search	 to	 become	 clear.	 Now	 a	 determination	 arises.	 You	 are	 no	 longer
interested	in	the	others,	particularly	if	everything	has	gone	right	–	and	I	have	to
repeat	this	again	and	again	because	it	never	goes	right.	At	the	age	of	forty-nine,
one	becomes	disinterested	in	women.	A	woman	becomes	disinterested	in	man	–
the	menopause,	the	forty-ninth	year…	The	man	doesn’t	feel	like	being	sexual.
The	whole	thing	looks	a	little	juvenile,	the	whole	thing	looks	a	little	immature.
But	 society	 can	 force…	 In	 the	 East,	 they	 have	 been	 against	 sex	 and	 they
have	suppressed	sex.	When	a	boy	is	fourteen	they	are	suppressing	sex,	and	they
want	to	believe	that	he	is	still	a	child:	he	doesn’t	think	about	girls.	Other	boys
maybe	 –	 they	 always	 belong	 to	 the	 neighborhood,	 never	 your	 boy;	 he	 is
innocent,	like	a	child,	like	an	angel.	And	he	looks	very	innocent,	but	that’s	not
true:	he	fantasizes.	The	girl	has	entered	his	consciousness,	has	 to	enter	–	 it	 is
natural	–	and	he	has	to	hide	it.	He	starts	masturbating,	and	he	has	to	hide	it.	He
has	wet	dreams	and	he	has	to	hide	it.
In	 the	 East,	 a	 boy	 of	 fourteen	 becomes	 guilty.	 Something	 wrong	 is
happening	–	only	to	him,	because	he	cannot	know	that	everybody	everywhere
is	doing	 the	 same.	And	much	 is	 expected	of	him	–	 that	 he	 should	 remain	 an
angel,	a	virgin,	not	thinking	about	girls,	not	even	dreaming	about	girls.	But	he
has	become	interested	and	society	is	suppressing.
In	 the	West,	 this	suppression	has	disappeared,	but	another	has	come	–	and
this	has	to	be	understood,	because	it	is	my	feeling	that	the	society	can	never	be
non-suppressive.	 If	 it	 changes	 one	 suppression,	 immediately	 it	 starts	 another.
Now	the	next	suppression	is	near	the	age	of	forty-nine	in	the	West:	people	are
forced	to	remain	in	sex	because	the	whole	teaching	says,	“What	are	you	doing?
–	a	man	can	be	sexually	potent	up	to	the	age	of	ninety!”	Great	authorities	are
saying	it.	And	if	you	are	not	potent,	and	you	are	not	interested,	you	start	feeling
guilty.	At	the	age	of	forty-nine,	a	man	starts	feeling	guilty	that	he	is	not	making
as	much	love	as	he	should.
There	 are	 teachers	who	go	on	 teaching:	 “This	 is	 nonsense.	You	 can	make
love,	you	can	make	love	up	to	the	age	of	ninety.	Go	on	making	love.”	And	they
say	 if	you	don’t	make	 love	you	will	 lose	potency.	 If	you	continue,	 then	your
organs	 continue	 functioning.	 If	 you	 stop,	 then	 they	will	 stop.	And	 once	 you
stop	sex,	life	energy	will	drop	down,	you	will	die	soon.
If	 the	 husband	 stops,	 the	wife	 is	 after	 him:	 “What	 are	 you	 doing?”	 If	 the
wife	stops	the	husband	is	after	her:	“This	is	against	the	psychologists	and	may
create	some	perversion!”
In	 the	East,	we	did	one	stupidity,	 and	 in	 the	West	also	 in	 the	ancient	days
they	 did	 the	 same.	 It	 was	 against	 religion	 for	 a	 child	 of	 fourteen	 to	 become
sexually	potent	–	and	he	becomes	so	naturally.	The	child	cannot	do	anything,	it
is	 beyond	his	 control.	What	 can	 he	 do?	How	can	 he	 do	 it?	And	 all	 teaching
about	brahmacharya	at	the	age	of	fourteen	is	stupid.	You	are	suppressing.	But
the	 old	 authorities,	 traditions,	 gurus,	 rishis,	 old	 psychologists	 and	 religious
people	–	 they	were	 all	 against,	 the	whole	 authority	was	 against.	A	 child	was
suppressed.	Guilt	was	created.	Nature	was	not	allowed.
Now	just	the	opposite	is	happening	at	the	other	end.	At	the	age	of	forty-nine,
psychologists	are	forcing	people	to	continue	to	make	love;	otherwise	you	will
lose	life.	And	at	the	age	of	forty-nine…	As	at	the	age	of	fourteen	sex	naturally
arises,	so	at	the	age	of	forty-nine	it	naturally	subsides.	It	has	to,	because	every
circle	has	to	be	complete.
That’s	why	in	India	we	had	decided	that	at	the	age	of	fifty	man	should	start
becoming	a	vanprasth,	his	eyes	should	move	toward	the	forest,	his	back	toward
the	marketplace.	Vanprasth	is	a	beautiful	word;	it	means	one	who	starts	looking
toward	 the	 Himalayas,	 toward	 the	 forest.	 Now	 his	 back	 is	 toward	 life	 and
ambitions	 and	 desires	 and	 all	 that.	 Finished.	 He	 starts	 moving	 toward
aloneness,	toward	being	himself.
Before	 this,	 life	 was	 too	 much	 and	 he	 could	 not	 be	 alone;	 there	 were
responsibilities	 to	 be	 fulfilled,	 children	 to	 be	 raised.	Now	 they	 have	 become
young	people.	They	are	married	–	by	the	time	you	are	forty-nine	your	children
are	getting	married,	settling.	They	are	no	longer	hippies,	they	must	be	reaching
the	age	of	twenty-eight.	They	will	settle	–	now	you	can	unsettle.	Now	you	can
move	beyond	 the	home;	you	can	become	homeless.	At	 the	age	of	 forty-nine,
one	should	start	looking	toward	the	forest,	moving	inward,	becoming	introvert,
becoming	more	and	more	meditative	and	prayerful.
At	 the	 age	 of	 fifty-six,	 again	 a	 change	 comes,	 a	 revolution.	Now	 it	 is	 not
enough	to	look	toward	the	Himalayas,	one	has	to	really	travel,	one	has	to	go.
Life	 is	ending,	death	 is	coming	nearer.	At	 the	age	of	 forty-nine	one	becomes
disinterested	 in	 the	 other	 sex.	 At	 the	 age	 of	 fifty-six	 one	 should	 become
uninterested	in	others,	society,	social	formalities,	the	club	–	Rotary	and	Lions.
At	the	age	of	fifty-six,	one	should	resign	from	all	Rotaries,	all	Lions;	it	looks
foolish	now,	childish.	Go	to	some	Rotary	Club	or	Lions	Club	and	see	people,
dressed	up	with	their	 ties	and	everything.	It	 looks	juvenile,	childish;	what	are
they	doing?	Lions	–	the	very	name	looks	foolish.	For	a	small	child,	good.	Now
they	 have	 for	 small	 children	 Cub	 clubs,	 and	 for	 women	 Lioness	 clubs.	 For
cubs,	perfectly	right,	but	for	lions	and	lionesses…?	It	shows	that	the	minds	are
mediocre.	They	have	no	intelligence,	nothing	at	all.
At	the	age	of	fifty-six,	one	should	be	so	mature	as	to	come	out	of	all	social
entanglements.	 Finished!	 One	 lived	 enough,	 learned	 enough;	 now	 one	 gives
thanks	 to	 everybody	 and	 comes	 out	 of	 it.	 Fifty-six	 is	 the	 time	 one	 should
naturally	become	a	sannyasin.	One	should	take	sannyas,	one	should	renounce.
It	 is	 natural	 –	 as	 you	 enter,	 so	 you	 should	 renounce.	 Life	 should	 have	 an
entrance	and	it	should	also	have	an	exit;	otherwise	it	will	be	suffocating.	You
enter	and	you	never	come	out	and	then	you	say	you	are	suffocated,	in	agony.
There	 is	 an	 exit,	 and	 that	 is	 sannyas.	 You	 come	 out.	 You	 are	 not	 even
interested	in	others	by	the	age	of	fifty-six.
By	the	age	of	sixty-three	you	again	become	like	a	child,	only	interested	in
yourself.	That	is	what	meditation	is	–	to	be	moving	inward,	as	if	everything	has
fallen	away.	Only	you	exist.	Again	you	have	become	a	child	–	of	course,	very
much	 enriched	 by	 life,	 very	 mature,	 understanding,	 with	 great	 intelligence.
Now	you	again	become	innocent.	You	start	moving	inward.	Only	seven	years
are	left,	and	you	have	to	prepare	for	death.	You	have	to	be	ready	to	die.	And
what	is	the	readiness	to	die?
To	 die	 celebrating	 is	 the	 readiness	 to	 die.	 To	 die	 happy,	 joyfully,	 to	 die
willingly,	welcomingly,	 is	 to	 be	 ready.	Existence	 gave	 you	 an	 opportunity	 to
learn,	and	be,	and	you	 learned.	Now	you	would	 like	 to	 rest.	Now	you	would
like	to	go	to	the	ultimate	home.
It	was	 a	 sojourn.	You	wandered	 in	 a	 strange	 land,	 you	 lived	with	 strange
people,	you	 loved	strangers,	and	you	 learned	much.	Now	 the	 time	has	come:
the	prince	must	return	to	his	own	kingdom.
Sixty-three	is	the	time	when	one	becomes	completely	enclosed	in	one’s	self.
The	whole	energy	moves	in	and	in	and	in,	turning	in.	You	become	a	circle	of
energy,	not	moving	anywhere.	No	reading,	not	much	 talking.	More	and	more
silent,	more	and	more	with	one’s	self,	remaining	totally	independent	of	all	that
is	around	you.	The	energy	by	and	by	subsides.
By	the	age	of	seventy,	you	are	ready.	And	if	you	have	followed	this	natural
pattern,	just	before	your	death,	nine	months	before	your	death,	you	will	become
aware	of	it.	As	a	child	has	to	pass	nine	months	in	the	mother’s	womb,	the	same
circle	 is	 totally	 repeated,	 completely	 repeated,	 utterly	 repeated.	 By	 the	 time
death	 comes,	 nine	 months	 before,	 you	 will	 become	 aware.	 Now	 you	 are
entering	 the	womb	again.	This	womb	 is	no	 longer	outside	 in	 the	mother,	 this
womb	is	inside	you.
Indians	call	the	innermost	shrine	of	a	temple	the	garbha,	 the	womb.	When
you	go	to	a	temple,	the	innermost	part	of	the	temple	is	called	the	womb.	It	 is
very	symbolically	called	so,	very	consideredly;	it	is	the	womb	one	has	to	enter.
In	the	last	phase	–	nine	months	–	one	enters	oneself,	one’s	own	body	becomes
the	womb.	One	moves	to	the	innermost	shrine	where	the	flame	has	always	been
burning,	where	the	light	has	always	been,	where	the	temple	is,	where	the	god
has	always	been	living.
This	is	the	natural	process.	For	this	natural	process	no	future	is	needed.	You
have	to	be	living	naturally	this	moment.	The	next	moment	will	come	out	of	it
on	its	own	accord	–	as	a	child	grows	and	becomes	a	youth.	There	is	no	need	to
plan	for	it,	one	simply	becomes;	it	is	natural,	it	happens.	As	a	river	flows	and
comes	 to	 the	 ocean,	 the	 same	way	 you	 flow,	 and	 you	 come	 to	 the	 final,	 the
ocean.	But	one	should	remain	natural,	floating,	and	in	the	moment.	Once	you
start	 thinking	 about	 the	 future	 and	 ambition	 and	 desire,	 you	 are	missing	 this
moment.	 And	 this	 moment	 missed	 will	 create	 perversion	 because	 you	 will
always	lack	something;	there	will	be	a	gap.
If	a	child	has	not	lived	his	childhood	well,	that	unlived	childhood	will	enter
his	youth	–	because	where	will	it	go?	It	has	to	be	lived.	And	when	a	child	is	at
the	age	of	four	and	dances	and	jumps	and	runs	around,	butterfly-catching,	it	is
beautiful.	But	when	a	young	man	of	 twenty	 runs	after	butterflies	he	 is	 crazy.
Then	you	have	to	admit	him	to	the	hospital;	he	is	a	mental	case.	Nothing	was
wrong	with	it	at	the	age	of	four;	it	was	just	natural,	it	was	the	thing	to	do.	It	was
the	right	 thing	 to	do;	 if	 the	 child	was	not	 running	after	 butterflies	 something
was	wrong,	he	had	to	be	taken	to	the	psychoanalyst.
Then	it	was	okay;	but	when	he	is	 twenty	and	running	after	butterflies,	you
should	suspect	something	has	gone	wrong,	he	has	not	grown	up.	The	body	has
grown,	the	mind	is	lagging	behind.	It	must	be	somewhere	in	his	childhood	–	he
was	not	allowed	to	live	it	completely.	If	he	lives	childhood	completely,	he	will
become	a	young	man:	 beautiful,	 fresh,	 uncontaminated	by	 the	 childhood.	He
will	shed	childhood	as	a	snake	sheds	its	old	skin.	He	will	come	out	of	it	fresh.
He	will	have	the	intelligence	of	a	young	man,	and	he	won’t	look	retarded.
Live	youth	 completely.	Don’t	 listen	 to	 the	Eastern	 and	ancient	 authorities.
Just	 drop	 them	 out	 of	 the	 way.	 If	 you	 meet	 them	 on	 the	 way,	 kill	 them
immediately.	 Don’t	 listen	 to	 them	 because	 they	 have	 killed	 youth,	 they	 are
suppressive	of	youth.	They	are	against	sex,	and	if	a	society	is	against	sex,	sex
will	spread	all	over	your	life.	It	will	become	poison.	Live	it!	Enjoy	it!
Between	the	fourteenth	and	twenty-first	year,	a	boy	is	at	his	highest	peak	of
sexuality.	In	fact,	near	the	age	of	seventeen	or	eighteen	he	reaches	the	peak	of
sexuality.	Never	will	he	be	so	potent.	And	if	those	moments	are	missed	he	will
never	achieve	the	beautiful	orgasm	that	could	have	been	achieved	near	the	age
of	seventeen	or	eighteen.
I	am	in	a	continuous	difficulty	because	society	forces	you	to	remain	celibate,
at	 least	 up	 to	 the	 twenty-first	 year.	 That	 means	 the	 greatest	 possibility	 of
achieving	sex,	learning	sex,	entering	sex,	will	be	missed.	By	the	time	you	reach
twenty-one,	 twenty-two,	you	are	already	old	as	 far	as	sex	 is	concerned!	Near
the	 age	of	 seventeen	you	were	 at	 the	peak	–	 so	potent,	 so	powerful,	 that	 the
orgasm,	the	sexual	orgasm,	would	have	spread	to	your	very	cells.	Your	whole
body	would	have	taken	a	bath	of	eternal	bliss.
And	when	I	say	sex	can	become	samadhi,	I	don’t	say	it	for	people	who	are
seventy,	remember.	I	am	saying	it	for	people	who	are	seventeen.	Old	men	come
to	 me	 and	 they	 say,	 “We	 have	 read	 your	 book,	 From	 Sex	 to
Superconsciousness,	but	we	never	achieve	anything	like	this.”
How	 can	 you	 achieve	 it?	 You	 have	 missed	 the	 time,	 and	 it	 cannot	 be
replaced.	And	I	am	not	responsible;	society	is	responsible,	and	you	listened	to
it.
If	between	 the	ages	of	 fourteen	and	 twenty-one	a	child	 is	 allowed	 to	have
free	 sex,	 absolutely	 free	 sex,	 he	 will	 never	 bother	 about	 sex.	 He	 will	 be
completely	 free.	He	will	not	 look	at	 the	magazines	Playboy	and	Playgirl.	 He
will	not	hide	nude,	ugly,	obscene	pictures	in	the	cupboard	or	in	The	Bible.	He
will	 not	 go	 out	 of	 his	way	 to	 throw	 things	 at	women.	He	will	 not	 become	 a
bottom-pincher.	These	 things	 are	 ugly,	 simply	 ugly,	 but	 you	 go	 on	 tolerating
them	and	not	feeling	what	is	happening,	why	everybody	is	neurotic.
Once	you	find	a	chance	to	rub	against	a	woman’s	body,	you	never	miss	it.
What	ugliness!	–	rubbing	against	a	body.	Something	has	remained	unfulfilled
in	you.	And	when	an	old	man	looks	with	lustful	eyes,	there	is	nothing	like	that;
it	is	the	ugliest	thing	in	the	world	when	an	old	man	looks	with	lust	in	his	eyes.
His	eyes	should	be	innocent	now,	he	must	be	finished	by	now.	Not	that	sex	is
something	ugly;	remember,	I	am	not	saying	sex	is	ugly.	Sex	is	beautiful	at	its
own	time	and	season,	and	it	is	ugly	out	of	season,	out	of	time.	Sex	is	a	disease
when	it	is	in	a	ninety-year-old	man.	That’s	why	people	say	“dirty	old	man.”	It
is	dirty.
A	 young	 man	 is	 beautiful,	 sexual.	 He	 shows	 vitality,	 life.	 An	 old	 man,
sexual,	 shows	 an	 unlived	 life,	 an	 empty	 life,	 immature.	 He	 missed	 the
opportunity	and	now	he	cannot	do	anything,	but	he	goes	on	thinking,	rambling
in	the	mind	about	sex,	fantasizing.
Remember,	between	the	fourteenth	and	the	twenty-first	year,	a	right	society
will	allow	absolute	freedom	for	sex.	And	then	society	will	become	less	sexual
automatically.	Beyond	 this	 time	 there	will	 be	 no	 sex;	 the	 disease	will	 not	 be
there.	Live	it	when	the	moment	is	ripe	and	forget	it	when	the	moment	has	gone.
But	 that	you	can	do	only	 if	 you	have	 lived;	otherwise	you	cannot	 forget	 and
you	cannot	forgive.	You	will	cling,	it	will	become	a	wound	inside.
In	 the	 East,	 don’t	 listen	 to	 the	 authorities,	 whatever	 they	 say.	 Listen	 to
nature.	When	nature	says	it	is	time	to	love,	love.	When	nature	says	it	is	time	to
renounce,	 renounce.	 And	 don’t	 listen	 to	 the	 foolish	 psychoanalysts	 and
psychologists	in	the	West.	Howsoever	refined	instruments	they	have	–	Masters
and	 Johnson	and	others	–	 and	however	many	vaginas	 they	have	been	 testing
and	examining,	they	don’t	know	life.
In	fact,	I	suspect	 that	 these	Masters	and	Johnsons	and	Kinseys	in	the	West
are	voyeurs.	They	themselves	are	ill	about	sex;	otherwise	who	bothers	to	watch
one	 thousand	 vaginas	with	 instruments	 –	watching	what	 is	 happening	 inside
when	a	woman	makes	 love?	Who	bothers?	What	nonsense!	But	when	 things
become	perverted,	this	type	of	thing	happens.	Now	Masters	and	Johnsons	have
become	the	experts,	the	final	authorities.	If	you	are	having	any	sexual	problem,
they	are	the	final	authority	to	go	to.	And	I	suspect	they	have	missed	their	youth,
they	have	not	lived	their	sex	lives	rightly.	Somewhere	something	is	lacking	and
they	are	fulfilling	it	through	such	tricks.
And	when	a	thing	is	in	the	garb	of	science	you	can	do	anything.	Now	they
have	made	false,	electric	penises,	and	those	electric	penises	go	on	throbbing	in
the	 real	 vaginas,	 and	 they	 go	 on	 trying	 to	 find	 what	 is	 happening	 inside,
whether	 orgasm	 is	 clitoral	 or	 vaginal,	 what	 hormones	 are	 flowing,	 what
hormones	are	not	flowing,	and	how	long	a	woman	can	make	love.	They	say:	to
the	very	end.	A	woman	can	make	love	on	her	deathbed.
In	 fact,	 their	 suggestion	 is	 that	 after	menopause	a	woman	can	make	better
love	than	ever	–	that	means	after	the	forty-ninth	year.	Why	do	they	say	that?	–
because,	 they	 say,	before	 the	 forty-ninth	a	woman	 is	 always	afraid	of	getting
pregnant.	Even	if	she	is	on	the	pill,	no	pill	is	a	hundred	percent	proof;	there	is	a
fear.	By	the	forty-ninth	year,	when	the	menopause	comes	and	the	period	stops,
then	there	is	no	fear;	a	woman	is	completely	free.
If	 their	 teaching	 spreads	 women	 are	 going	 to	 become	 vampires,	 and	 old
women	will	chase	men	because	they	are	unafraid	and	the	authority	sanctions	it.
In	fact,	they	say	that	then	is	the	right	time	to	enjoy	–	without	any	responsibility.
For	men	also	they	go	on	saying	the	same.	And	they	have	come	across	men	–	so
now	 they	say	 there	 is	no	average	–	 they	have	come	across	a	man	who	 in	his
sixtieth	 year	 can	make	 love	 five	 times	 a	 day.	This	man	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 freak.
Something	is	wrong	with	his	hormones	and	his	body.	And	at	the	age	of	sixty!
He	 is	 not	 natural,	 because	 as	 I	 see	 it	 –	 and	 this	 I	 am	 saying	 out	 of	my	 own
experiences	 in	many	 lives,	 I	 can	 remember	 them	–	 by	 the	 forty-ninth	 year	 a
natural	man	is	not	interested	in	women;	the	interest	goes.	As	it	comes,	it	goes.
Everything	 that	 comes	 has	 to	 go.	Everything	 that	 arises	 has	 to	 fall.	 Every
wave	 that	 arises	 has	 to	 disappear.	 There	 must	 be	 a	 time	 when	 it	 goes.	 At
fourteen	it	comes;	at	forty-nine	or	nearabout	it	goes.
But	a	man	making	love	five	times	a	day	at	the	age	of	sixty	–	something	is
wrong,	something	is	very,	very	wrong.	His	body	is	not	functioning	rightly.	It	is
the	other	end	of	impotence,	the	other	extreme.	When	a	boy	of	fourteen	does	not
feel	any	sex,	a	young	man	of	eighteen	has	no	desire,	something	is	wrong	–	he
has	 to	be	 treated.	When	a	man	of	 sixty	needs	 to	make	 love	 five	 times	a	day,
something	 is	wrong.	His	body	has	gone	berserk.	 It	 is	not	 functioning	 rightly,
naturally.
If	 you	 live	 in	 the	moment	 totally,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 worry	 for	 the
future.	A	 rightly	 lived	 childhood	brings	you	 to	 a	 right,	 ripe	youth	–	 flowing,
vital,	alive,	a	wild	ocean	of	energy.	A	rightly	lived	youth	brings	you	to	the	very
settled	 calm	 and	 quiet	 life.	 A	 calm	 and	 quiet	 life	 brings	 you	 to	 a	 religious
inquiry:	What	is	life?	Living	is	not	enough,	one	has	to	penetrate	the	mystery.	A
calm	and	quiet	life	brings	you	to	meditative	moments.	Meditation	brings	you	to
renounce	all	that	is	useless	now,	just	junk,	garbage.	The	whole	of	life	becomes
garbage;	 only	 one	 thing	 remains	 always	 eternally	 valuable,	 and	 that	 is	 your
awareness.
By	the	time	of	the	seventieth	year,	when	you	are	ready	to	die	–	if	you	lived
everything	 rightly,	 in	 the	 moment,	 never	 postponing	 for	 the	 future,	 never
dreaming	for	the	future,	you	lived	in	the	moment	totally,	whatsoever	it	was	–
nine	months	 before	 your	 death	 you	will	 become	 aware…	You	 have	 attained
that	much	awareness,	you	can	see:	now	death	is	coming.
Many	saints	have	declared	their	deaths,	but	I	have	not	come	across	a	single
instance	when	 the	 death	was	 declared	 earlier	 than	nine	months.	Exactly	 nine
months	 before,	 a	man	of	 awareness,	 uncluttered	with	 the	 past	 –	 because	 one
who	never	thinks	of	the	future	will	never	think	of	the	past.	They	are	together,
the	past	and	future	are	together,	joined	together.	When	you	think	of	the	future,
it	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 projection	 of	 the	 past;	when	 you	 think	 of	 the	 past,	 it	 is
nothing	but	trying	to	plan	for	the	future.	They	are	together.	The	present	is	out
of	them.	A	man	who	lives	in	this	moment	now	and	here	is	not	cluttered	with	the
past	 and	 not	 cluttered	 with	 the	 future.	 He	 remains	 unburdened.	 He	 has	 no
burden	 to	 carry,	 he	moves	without	weight.	Gravitation	doesn’t	 affect	 him.	 In
fact,	he	doesn’t	walk,	he	flies.	He	has	wings.
Before	he	dies,	exactly	nine	months	before,	he	will	become	aware	that	death
is	coming.	And	he	will	enjoy	and	he	will	celebrate	and	he	will	tell	people,	“My
ship	is	coming,	and	I	am	only	on	this	bank	a	little	while	more.	Soon	I	will	be
going	to	my	home.	This	life	has	been	beautiful,	a	strange	experience.	I	loved,
learned,	 lived	much,	 I	 am	 enriched.	 I	 had	 come	 here	with	 nothing	 and	 I	 am
going	with	much	experience,	much	maturity.”
He	will	be	thankful	to	all	that	has	happened	–	both	good	and	bad,	both	right
and	wrong	both,	because	he	learned	from	everything,	not	only	from	right,	from
wrong	also.	Sages	that	he	came	across,	he	learned	from	them;	and	sinners,	yes,
from	them	also	–	they	all	helped.	People	who	robbed	him	helped,	people	who
helped	him	helped;	people	who	were	friends	helped,	people	who	were	enemies
helped.	Everything	helped.	Summer	and	winter,	satiety	and	hunger,	everything
helped.	One	can	be	thankful	to	all.
When	one	is	thankful	to	all,	and	ready	to	die	celebrating	for	this	opportunity
that	was	there,	death	becomes	beautiful.	Then	death	is	not	the	enemy,	it	is	the
greatest	friend,	because	it	is	the	crescendo	of	life.	It	is	the	highest	peak	that	life
achieves.	It	is	not	the	end	of	life,	it	is	the	climax.	It	looks	like	the	end	because
you	have	never	known	life.	To	one	who	has	known	life	it	appears	as	the	very
crescendo,	the	very	peak,	the	highest	peak.
Death	is	the	culmination,	the	fulfillment.	Life	does	not	end	in	it;	in	fact,	life
flowers	 in	 it,	 it	 is	 the	 flower.	But	 to	know	the	beauty	of	death,	one	has	 to	be
ready	for	it,	one	has	to	learn	the	art.	That’s	why	I	go	on	saying	that	I	am	here	to
teach	you	how	 to	 die.	A	master	 is	 a	 death.	He	 allows	you	 to	 die	 in	 him.	He
helps	 you	 to	 die	 every	 moment	 to	 the	 past,	 and	 he	 helps	 you	 to	 live	 an
uncluttered	moment	–	this	moment.
	
Chapter	2:	Man	Is	a	Rainbow
	
Man	is	a	rainbow,	all	the	seven	colors	together.	That	is	his	beauty	and	that	is
his	 problem	 too.	 Man	 is	 multifaceted,	 multidimensional.	 His	 being	 is	 not
simple,	it	is	a	great	complexity.	And	out	of	that	complexity	is	born	the	harmony
we	call	God:	the	divine	melody.
So	the	first	thing	to	be	understood	about	man	is	that	man	is	not	yet.	Man	is
only	a	possibility,	a	potentiality.	Man	can	be,	man	is	a	promise.	The	dog	is,	the
rock	is,	the	sun	is	–	man	can	be.	Hence	the	anxiety	and	anguish.	One	can	miss
too;	 there	 is	 no	 certainty.	 You	 may	 flower,	 you	 may	 not	 flower.	 Hence	 the
shivering,	 the	 shaking,	 the	 trembling	 inside:	 “Who	 knows	whether	 I	 will	 be
able	to	do	it	or	not?”
Man	 is	 a	 bridge	 between	 the	 animal	 and	 the	 divine.	 The	 animals	 are
tremendously	 happy	 –	 of	 course	 not	 aware,	 not	 consciously	 happy,	 but
tremendously	happy,	unworried,	non-neurotic.	God	is	tremendously	happy	and
conscious.	Man	is	just	in	between	the	two,	in	limbo,	always	wavering	–	to	be	or
not	to	be?
Man	 is	 a	 rainbow,	 I	 say,	 because	 a	 rainbow	 will	 give	 you	 the	 total
perspective	in	which	man	can	be	understood	–	from	the	lowest	to	the	highest.
The	rainbow	has	seven	colors,	man	has	seven	centers	of	his	being.	The	allegory
of	the	seven	is	very	ancient.	In	India,	the	allegory	has	taken	the	form	of	seven
chakras:	the	lowest	is	muladhar	and	the	highest	is	sahasrar	and	between	these
two	are	five	steps,	five	more	chakras.	And	man	has	 to	pass	 through	all	seven
chakras	–	seven	steps	toward	the	divine.
Ordinarily,	 we	 are	 stuck	 at	 the	 lowest.	 The	 first	 three	 –	 muladhar,
svadhishthan	and	manipura	–	are	animal	chakras.	If	you	live	in	the	first	three,
you	are	no	different	to	the	animals	–	and	then	you	are	committing	a	crime.	Not
that	you	are	actually	committing	a	crime	–	you	are	committing	a	crime	because
you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 be	 what	 you	 were	 meant	 to	 be;	 you	 will	 miss	 the
possibility.	If	a	seed	does	not	grow	to	be	a	flower,	it	has	committed	a	crime	–
against	nobody;	against	himself.	And	the	sin	that	one	commits	against	oneself
is	 the	 greatest.	 In	 fact,	 we	 commit	 sins	 toward	 others	 only	 when	 we	 have
committed	the	first,	fundamental	sin	against	ourselves.
The	first	three	chakras	are	concerned	with	food,	money,	power,	domination,
sex.	Food	is	the	lowest,	sex	is	the	highest,	in	the	lowest	three	chakras.	This	has
to	be	understood.	Food	is	the	lowest	–	a	food-obsessed	person	is	in	the	lowest
category	of	 animals.	He	 simply	wants	 to	 survive.	He	has	no	purpose,	he	 just
wants	to	survive	for	survival’s	sake.	If	you	ask	him	for	what,	he	has	no	answer
to	give	to	you.
	
One	day,	Mulla	Nasruddin	told	me,	“I	wish	I	had	more	land.”
I	asked	him,	“But	why?	As	it	is,	you	have	enough.”
He	said,	“I	could	raise	a	lot	more	cows.”
I	asked	him,	“And	what	would	you	do	with	them?”
He	said,	“Sell	them	and	make	money.”
“And	then?	Then	what	you	are	going	to	do	with	that	money?”
“Buy	more	land.”
And	I	asked	him,	“For	what?”
“To	raise	a	lot	more	cows.”
	
This	way	it	goes,	just	a	vicious	circle	in	which	you	never	come	out:	you	eat
to	live,	you	live	to	eat.	This	is	the	lowest	possibility.	The	lowest	form	of	life	is
the	amoeba.	The	amoeba	simply	eats,	that’s	all.	An	amoeba	has	no	sex	life,	an
amoeba	 goes	 on	 eating	 whatsoever	 is	 available	 –	 the	 amoeba	 is	 exactly	 the
symbol	of	 the	 lowest	man.	The	amoeba	has	no	other	organs,	only	 the	mouth;
his	whole	body	functions	as	a	mouth.	He	goes	on	digesting	whatsoever	comes
close	by;	whatsoever	comes	close,	he	simply	digests	it.	He	absorbs	it	with	his
whole	body;	his	whole	body	 is	a	mouth.	He	becomes	more	and	more,	bigger
and	bigger;	 then	comes	 a	point	where	he	 is	 too	big	 and	he	 cannot	manage	–
then	he	splits	in	two.	Then	there	are	two	amoebas	instead	of	one;	then	they	start
doing	the	same	thing.	The	amoeba	simply	eats	and	lives,	and	lives	to	eat	more.
A	 few	 people	 live	 at	 this	 lowest	 level.	 Beware	 of	 it	 –	 life	 has	 something
more	 to	 give	 to	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 just	 survival,	 it	 is	 survival	 for	 something
significant.	 Survival	 is	 necessary	 but	 is	 not	 the	 end	 unto	 itself;	 it	 is	 just	 a
means.
The	second	type,	a	little	higher	than	the	food-obsessed,	is	the	power-maniac,
the	 politician.	 He	 wants	 to	 dominate	 people.	 For	 what?	 He	 feels	 very,	 very
inferior	 deep	 inside:	 he	wants	 to	 show	 to	 the	world:	 “I	 am	 somebody;	 I	 can
dominate,	I	can	put	you	in	your	right	place.”	He	has	not	put	himself	in	his	right
place	and	he	tries	 to	put	 the	whole	world	in	 its	place.	He	 is	 the	ego-obsessed
person.	He	can	move	in	any	direction:	if	he	moves	into	money,	he	will	go	on
hoarding	money	–	money	becomes	the	power	symbol.	If	he	moves	into	politics,
he	 cannot	 contain	 himself	 until	 he	 has	 reached	 the	 very	 end	 –	 and	 there	 is
nothing.
The	real	man	tries	to	conquer	himself,	not	others.	He	wants	to	know	himself.
He	does	not	want	to	fulfill	some	inner	gap	by	dominating	somebody	else.	The
real	man	loves	freedom	for	himself	and	for	others	too.
Third	is	sex	–	and	I	say	it	is	better	than	food,	than	politics,	because	it	has	a
little	 higher	 quality:	 it	 shares.	 It	 has	 something	 higher.	 In	 food,	 you	 simply
absorb;	you	don’t	 share.	 In	domination,	you	destroy;	you	don’t	create.	Sex	 is
the	highest	possibility	on	the	lower	plane	–	you	share,	you	share	your	energy,
and	you	become	creative.	As	 far	as	animal	existence	 is	concerned,	 sex	 is	 the
highest	value.	And	people	are	stuck	somewhere	with	these	three.
The	 fourth	 is	 the	anahata	 chakra.	The	 first	 three	are	animal,	 the	 last	 three
are	divine,	and	in	between	these	two	is	the	fourth,	anahata	–	the	heart	chakra,
the	 lotus	of	 the	heart,	 the	chakra	of	 love.	And	 that	 is	 the	bridge.	Love	 is	 the
bridge	 between	 the	 animal	 and	 the	 divine.	 Try	 to	 understand	 it	 as	 deeply	 as
possible.	Below	the	heart,	a	man	is	animal;	above	the	heart,	he	becomes	divine.
Only	 in	 the	heart	 is	a	man	human.	That’s	why	a	man	who	can	 feel,	who	can
love,	who	can	pray,	who	can	cry,	who	can	laugh,	who	can	share,	who	can	have
compassion,	 is	 the	 real	 human	being.	Humanity	has	 dawned	 in	 him,	 the	 first
rays	of	the	sun	have	entered	in	him.
Then	 fifth	 is	 vishuddha,	 sixth	 is	 agya,	 and	 seventh	 is	 sahasrar.	With	 the
fifth,	love	becomes	more	and	more	meditative,	more	and	more	prayerful.	With
the	 sixth,	 love	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 relationship.	 It	 is	 not	 even	 a	 prayer	 –	 it	 has
become	 a	 state	 of	 being.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 you	 love	 somebody,	 no.	 Now	 it	 is
something	like	you	are	love.	It	is	not	a	question	of	loving	–	your	very	energy	is
love.	 You	 cannot	 do	 otherwise.	 Now	 love	 is	 the	 natural	 flow	 –	 just	 as	 you
breathe,	 so	 you	 love;	 it	 is	 an	 unconditional	 state.	 And	 with	 the	 seventh	 is
samadhi,	sahasrar:	you	have	arrived	home.
In	Christian	theology,	you	can	find	the	same	allegory	in	the	story	that	God
created	the	world	in	six	days	and	on	the	seventh	day	he	rested.	Those	six	days
are	 the	 six	 chakras	 –	 the	 six	 centers	 of	 being.	 The	 seventh	 is	 rest:	 one	 has
arrived	home,	one	rests.	That	allegory	has	not	been	understood	well.	Christians,
and	particularly	Christian	theologians,	never	go	very	deep.	Their	understanding
remains	superficial	–	at	 the	most,	 logical,	 theoretical,	but	 it	never	 touches	the
real	point.	God	created	 the	world:	 first	he	created	matter,	 and	 last	he	created
man.	 For	 five	 days	 he	 was	 creating	 everything	 else	 in	 the	 world	 –	 matter,
animals,	birds	–	then	on	the	sixth	day	he	created	man.	And	in	the	last	moment
of	 the	sixth	day	he	created	woman.	Now	this	 is	very	symbolic:	woman	is	 the
last	creation	–	even	man	is	not	the	last.	And	the	allegory	is	still	more	beautiful
because	 it	 says	 he	 created	 woman	 out	 of	 man.	 That	 means	 woman	 is	 a
refinement	of	man,	a	more	purified	form.
First:	a	woman	means	intuition,	poetry,	imagination.	Man	means	will,	prose,
logic,	 reason.	 These	 are	 symbols:	 man	means	 an	 aggressive	 quality,	 woman
means	 receptivity.	 Receptivity	 is	 the	 highest.	 Man	 means	 logic,	 reasoning.
analysis,	philosophy;	woman	means	religion,	poetry,	imagination	–	more	fluid,
more	flexible.	Man	is	fighting	with	God.	Science	is	purely	a	male	by-product	–
man	 fighting,	 struggling,	 trying	 to	 conquer.	Woman	 never	 fights;	 she	 simply
welcomes,	she	waits,	she	surrenders.
And	the	Christian	allegory	says	God	created	man	first.	Man	is	the	highest	in
the	animal	kingdom	–	but	as	 far	as	humanity	 is	concerned,	woman	 is	higher.
Christian	 theologians	 have	 interpreted	 it	 in	 an	 absolutely	 wrong	 way	 –	 they
have	interpreted	in	a	male	chauvinist	way.	They	think	man	is	more	important,
so	 God	 created	 man	 first.	 Then	 animals	 must	 be	 even	 more	 important!	 The
logic	is	false.	They	think	man	is	the	real	thing,	woman	is	just	an	appendix.	At
the	last	moment,	God	felt	that	something	was	missing	so	he	took	one	bone	out
of	man	and	created	the	woman.	Woman	is	not	to	be	thought	very	significant	–
just	 a	helpmate,	 just	 so	 that	man	 feels	good,	otherwise	he	will	be	alone.	The
story	is	analyzed	in	such	a	way	that	it	seems	that	woman	is	less	important	than
man	–	just	a	toy	for	man	to	play	with,	otherwise	he	will	be	alone.	God	loved
man	so	much	that	he	thought	he	would	be	sad	and	lonely.	No,	this	is	not	true.
Imagination	comes	only	when	the	will	is	surrendered.	The	same	energy	that
is	 will	 becomes	 imagination,	 and	 the	 same	 energy	 that	 becomes	 aggression
becomes	reception,	and	the	same	energy	that	fights	becomes	cooperation.	The
same	 energy	 that	 is	 anger	 becomes	 compassion.	 Compassion	 comes	 out	 of
anger;	 it	 is	a	refinement	of	anger,	 it	 is	a	higher	symphony	out	of	anger.	Love
arises	out	of	sex;	it	is	a	higher	reach,	more	purified.
God	 created	woman	 after	 he	 created	man	 because	woman	 can	 be	 created
only	 afterward.	 First	 you	 have	 to	 create	 the	 crude	 energy	 and	 then	 you	 can
refine	 it.	 The	 refinement	 cannot	 come	 first.	 And	 in	 this	 allegory	 there	 is	 a
message	 –	 that	 every	man	 has	 to	 become	 feminine	 before	 he	 reaches	 to	 the
seventh.	 This	 is	 at	 the	 sixth	 center.	 In	 yoga,	 the	 sixth	 center	 is	 called	 agya
chakra	–	it	means	the	center	of	will.	Agya	means	order,	commandment.	It	is	the
most	powerful	center,	the	sixth,	and	many	become	stuck	there.	Then	they	go	on
playing	 with	 spiritual	 energies	 and	 go	 on	 doing	 foolish	 things.	 At	 the	 sixth
center,	man	has	to	turn	into	a	woman	and	his	whole	will	has	to	be	used	for	only
one	 thing	–	 that	 is,	 he	has	 to	will	 surrender.	To	will	 surrender	 is	 the	greatest
thing	 in	 the	 world;	 and	 this	 can	 be	 done	 only	 if	 you	 have	 willpower	 –	 not
ordinary,	extraordinary	willpower.
Ordinarily,	you	think	people	who	surrender	are	weaklings	–	you	are	wrong.
Only	very	strong	people	can	surrender,	surrender	needs	strength,	great	strength.
If	you	surrender	out	of	weakness,	your	surrender	 is	meaningless,	 impotent.	 If
you	surrender	out	of	 strength,	 then	your	 surrender	has	meaning,	 significance.
At	 the	 sixth	 center,	 when	 will	 comes	 to	 its	 ultimate	 focusing,	 surrender	 is
possible.	Out	of	will	is	created	surrender:	out	of	man,	God	created	woman.
At	the	sixth	center…	Now	if	you	ask	the	brain	surgeons,	they	will	also	agree
with	me	–	they	say	the	brain	is	divided	into	two	hemispheres:	man	and	woman,
the	left	and	the	right.	The	left	brain	is	male	and	the	right	brain	is	female.	The
right	 brain	 is	 connected	 with	 the	 left	 hand;	 that’s	 why	 the	 left	 hand	 is	 not
appreciated	–	even	condemned.	The	right	hand	is	associated	with	the	left	brain
–	hence,	right	seems	to	be	right	and	left	seems	to	be	wrong.	It	is	a	man-oriented
world,	male-dominated	world.	The	 right	 hand	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 the	male,	 the
left	 hand	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 the	 female.	 And	 your	 head	 is	 divided	 into	 two
hemispheres.
A	poet	functions	from	a	different	part	of	his	head	than	a	logician.	A	poet	is
more	feminine.	It	 is	not	 just	a	coincidence	that	 if	you	look	at	great	poets	you
will	 find	 great	 femininity,	 grace,	 beauty,	 a	 charm,	 a	 tremendous	 attraction,	 a
charisma,	feminine	charisma.	If	you	look	at	painters	you	will	find	them	a	little
effeminate;	their	dress,	their	long	hair,	their	way	of	walking,	is	more	feminine.
I	have	heard…
	
In	India,	 there	was	a	very	compassionate	bodhisattva,	but	when	Buddhism
reached	China,	 they	 could	 not	 believe	 that	 he	 could	 be	 a	man:	How	 is	 such
compassion	possible	in	a	man?	So	they	made	statues	of	him	as	a	woman.	Those
statues	 are	 called	 Kuan	 Yin,	 and	 they	 are	 still	 worshipped.	 The	 story	 is
beautiful.
The	 Buddhist	 monks	 who	 carried	 Buddha’s	 message	 to	 China	 tried	 to
explain:	“You	are	foolish.	This	is	not	a	woman,	but	a	man.”
But	 the	 sculptors	 said:	 “We	 cannot	 do	 it.	 Our	 understanding	 is	 that	 such
compassion	 is	 possible	 only	 in	 a	 woman,	 not	 a	 man.”	 So	 they	 depicted	 a
woman.
	
The	story	 is	of	 tremendous	 import.	Buddha	looks	more	 like	a	woman	than
like	a	man	–	his	face,	his	grace.	The	sixth	center	has	been	surrendered.	Logic
has	 been	 surrendered	 to	 love,	 argument	 has	 been	 surrendered	 to	 feeling;
aggression	 has	 become	 reception.	Conflict	 has	 turned	 into	 cooperation.	Now
there	is	no	struggle	between	the	part	and	the	whole;	the	part	is	flowing	with	the
whole,	the	part	is	in	a	let-go	–	the	whole	has	possessed	it.
That	is	the	meaning	of	the	Christian	allegory	that	God	created	man	first,	and
then	 woman	 out	 of	 man.	 This	 is	 to	 pay	 tremendous	 respect	 to	 feminine
qualities:	they	are	higher	than	man,	they	come	out	of	man,	they	flower	out	of
man.	And	 then,	 on	 the	 seventh	day,	God	 rested.	What	 else	 can	you	do	when
you	have	come	home?	Sahasrar	is	the	center	of	rest,	absolute	rest	–	you	have
arrived;	now	there	is	nowhere	to	go.
The	lowest	–	muladhar	–	is	the	center	of	unrest,	the	highest	is	the	center	of
rest,	and	between	these	two	there	are	seven	divisions.	You	can	call	them	seven
colors	–	yes,	man	 is	 a	 rainbow.	Or,	 you	 can	 call	 them	 seven	notes	of	music.
Eastern	music	divides	sound	into	seven	notes:	sa,	re,	ga,	ma,	pa,	dha,	ni	–	these
are	 the	 seven	 basic	 notes.	 And	 out	 of	 these	 seven	 basic	 notes	 all	 music	 is
created	–	all	symphony,	all	melody,	all	song,	all	dance.
Remember,	seven	is	a	very	significant	number.
And	one	more	thing:	to	be	more	modern	and	contemporary,	I	would	like	to
divide	these	seven	centers	in	this	way.	The	first	I	call	no-mind.	No-mind	means
the	mind	is	fast	asleep	–	muladhar.	It	is	there,	but	so	fast	asleep	that	you	cannot
even	detect	it.	In	a	rock,	God	is	fast	asleep.	In	man	he	has	become	a	little	alert
–	just	a	 little	alert,	not	very	much.	 In	a	rock	he	 is	 fast	asleep,	snoring.	 If	you
listen	closely	you	will	hear	the	snoring	–	God	snoring.	That’s	why	rocks	are	so
beautiful	–	so	deeply	silent,	no	turmoil,	no	anxiety,	nowhere	to	go.	This	I	call
no-mind.	I	don’t	mean	by	no-mind	that	they	have	no	mind;	I	simply	mean	the
mind	has	not	manifested	yet.	The	mind	is	waiting	in	seed,	the	mind	is	getting
ready	to	awake,	the	mind	is	preparing,	the	mind	is	resting.	Sooner	or	later	there
will	be	morning	and	the	rock	will	become	a	bird	and	will	start	flying,	or	will
become	a	tree	and	will	start	blossoming.
The	second	state	 I	call	unconscious	mind.	 In	 the	 trees,	 the	mind	 is	 there	–
not	 like	 the	 rock,	 God	 has	 become	 a	 little	 different	 from	 the	 rock.	 Not
conscious,	 unconscious.	Trees	 feel	 –	 they	 cannot	 feel	 that	 they	 feel,	 but	 they
feel.	Listen	to	the	difference.	If	you	hit	a	tree	she	feels	it,	but	she	cannot	feel
that	she	feels	it.	That	much	awareness	has	not	happened.	Feeling	has	come	in,
the	 tree	 is	 sensitive.	And	 now	 there	 are	modern	 experiments	 proving	 it,	 that
trees	are	tremendously	sensitive.
This	 I	 call	 unconscious	 mind.	 Mind	 is	 there	 –	 almost	 like	 when	 one	 is
asleep.	 In	 the	morning	 one	 remembers	 that	 it	 was	 a	 beautiful	 night:	 “I	 slept
deeply,	 the	sleep	was	very	profound.”	But	you	remember	 in	 the	morning,	not
when	 the	 actual	 sleep	 is	 happening;	 you	 remember	 later	 on,	 retrospectively.
Mind	 was	 there	 in	 sleep,	 but	 was	 not	 functioning	 at	 that	 moment;	 it	 only
functions	retrospectively,	later	on.	In	the	morning	you	remember	–	a	beautiful
night,	such	a	soothing	and	satiny	night,	such	deep	silence	and	such	happiness	–
but	you	recognize	it	in	the	morning.
The	 third	 state	 is	 subconscious	 mind.	 Subconscious	 mind	 is	 in	 the	 birds,
animals.	 It	 is	 like	 dreaming.	 In	 a	 dream	you	 become	 a	 little	more	 conscious
than	you	are	in	your	sleep.	Let	us	say	the	rocks	are	in	a	coma;	in	the	morning
they	will	not	even	be	able	 to	 remember	how	profound	 the	sleep	was	–	 it	 is	a
coma.	The	 trees	are	asleep;	when	 they	awake,	 they	will	 remember.	The	birds
and	the	animals	are	dreaming	–	they	are	very	close	to	humanity.	I	call	this	the
subconscious	mind.
The	fourth	I	call	conscious	mind.	That’s	where	man	is.	Not	very	conscious;
just	a	flicker,	 just	a	small	wave	of	consciousness	–	and	that	 too	happens	only
when	 you	 are	 in	 tremendous	 danger,	 otherwise	 not.	 If	 somebody	 suddenly
comes	and	 is	 ready	 to	kill	you	with	a	dagger,	you	will	become	conscious.	 In
that	 moment	 there	 will	 be	 tremendous	 awareness,	 intelligence,	 radiance.
Thinking	will	 stop.	You	will	 become	 a	 flame.	Only	 in	 rare	moments	 do	 you
really	become	conscious;	otherwise,	you	move	almost	like	a	somnambulist.
I	have	heard…
	
In	 1959,	 two	 drunkards	 in	 the	 French	 town	 of	 Vienne	 opened	 what	 they
thought	was	 a	door	 to	 the	 street.	Actually	 it	was	 the	window	of	 a	 room	 four
stories	up.	With	a	gay	song	on	their	lips	they	marched	out,	arm	in	arm	over	the
sill	to	the	street	below.
A	beat	policeman,	hearing	the	thuds	and	rushing	to	help,	was	dumbfounded
to	watch	them	careering	away,	still	singing	and	obviously	in	tip-top	condition.
“We	missed	our	step,”	they	explained.
	
They	were	 not	 aware	 at	 all.	 Had	 they	 been	 aware,	 they	might	 have	 died.
They	were	not	aware;	they	simply	thought	they	had	missed	a	step.	Four	stories!
And	this	is	your	situation	too.	Your	whole	life	is	almost	that	of	a	drunkard.
You	go	on	stumbling	here	and	there,	missing	one	step	here,	another	step	there.
Your	whole	 life	 is	 nothing	but	misery	 upon	misery,	 stumbling,	 bumping	 into
each	other.	You	may	call	it	love,	but	what	it	comes	to	is	just	bumping	into	each
other.	It	creates	misery.
Only	 consciousness	 can	 give	 ecstasy.	 Ecstasy	 is	 the	 shadow	 of
consciousness.	This	 is	 the	fourth	stage	 in	which	ordinarily	human	beings	 live
and	 die.	 This	 is	 a	 sheer	 wastage.	 Rocks	 can	 be	 forgiven	 and	 trees	 can	 be
forgiven	and	birds	can	be	 forgiven,	but	not	man	–	because	you	have	 the	 first
glimpse:	now	it	is	your	responsibility	to	grow	it,	to	make	it	more	solid,	to	make
it	stronger.	You	cannot	say	to	a	rock:	“You	missed,”	but	you	can	say	to	a	man:
“You	missed.”
Man	 is	 the	 only	 responsible	 animal	 –	 he	 can	 be	 asked,	 he	 will	 have	 to
answer:	that	is	the	meaning	of	responsibility.	One	day	or	other,	he	will	have	to
answer	to	God	or	to	the	center	of	this	existence	or	to	existence	itself:	“How	did
you	miss?	You	were	given	the	rudimentary	beginning,	you	could	have	grown	it.
You	were	given	the	seed,	you	could	have	blossomed.	Why	did	you	miss?”
That’s	the	anxiety	of	man,	the	agony,	the	trembling,	 the	anguish	–	because
man	is	the	only	animal	in	this	world	who	can	become	ecstatic,	who	can	achieve
to	 conscious	 blissfulness,	 who	 can	 become	 sat-chit-anand:	 who	 can	 become
truth,	 consciousness,	 being,	 who	 can	 become	 bliss,	 who	 can	 come	 to	 the
ultimate.
The	 fifth	 I	 call	 the	 sub-superconscious	 mind.	 At	 the	 fourth	 stage	 –	 the
conscious	 mind	 –	 your	 consciousness	 is	 just	 a	 very	 flickering	 thing,	 very
momentary.	It	has	no	stability,	comes	and	goes,	and	is	beyond	your	power;	you
cannot	recall	it	when	it	is	needed.	All	religions	exist	between	the	conscious	and
the	 superconscious	mind.	All	 techniques	 of	 yoga,	 all	 techniques	 as	 such,	 are
nothing	 but	 to	 transform	 your	 consciousness	 into	 the	 superconsciousness.
Gurdjieff	 calls	 it	 self-remembering.	 Kabir	 calls	 it	 Surati	 Yoga–	 surati	 also
means	 remembering.	 Jesus	 says	 again	 and	 again:	 “Be	 aware!	 Be	 awake!
Watch!”	 Buddha	 says:	 “Be	 alert.”	 Krishnamurti	 goes	 on	 talking	 about
awareness;	for	forty	years	he	has	been	talking	about	only	one	thing,	and	that	is
awareness.	One	word	 is	 the	whole	message:	 that	word	 is	 the	bridge	between
conscious	mind	and	superconscious	mind.
When	your	consciousness	has	become	a	stable	 factor	 in	you,	an	 integrated
factor	 in	you,	a	crystallized	factor	 in	you,	and	you	can	depend	on	 it….	Right
now,	 you	 cannot	 depend	 on	 it.	 You	 are	 going	 along,	 very	 conscious,	 and
somebody	 hits	 you	 –	 immediately	 the	 consciousness	 is	 gone;	 it	 is	 not
dependable.	Somebody	says	a	simple	word,	somebody	says	 to	you,	“Are	you
an	idiot?”	–	and	consciousness	 is	gone.	Just	 the	word	 idiot	and	your	eyes	are
bloodshot,	and	you	are	ready	to	be	killed	or	to	kill.
Even	people	who	seem	to	be	very,	very	alert	and	aware	may	be	just	alert	and
aware	because	they	have	escaped	the	situations.	Their	alertness	is	not	real.	You
can	go	to	the	Himalayas,	you	can	sit	in	a	cave	–	nobody	will	come	to	call	you
an	idiot.	Who	will	bother	to	come	to	a	Himalayan	cave	to	call	you	an	idiot?	Of
course	you	will	not	get	angry.	Your	state	of	awareness	in	a	Himalayan	cave	is
not	 worth	 much	 because	 there	 is	 no	 test	 for	 it,	 no	 possibility	 to	 destroy	 it.
Hence,	 Kabir	 says:	 “Be	 in	 the	 world.	 Don’t	 be	 of	 the	 world,	 but	 be	 in	 the
world,	 live	 in	 the	 world.”	 Live	 in	 the	 ordinary	 situations	 where	 everything
provokes	you	to	be	unconscious	and	everybody	helps	you	to	be	conscious.
If	you	understand	it,	 the	world	is	a	great	device	of	God	to	make	you	more
conscious.	 Your	 enemy	 is	 your	 friend,	 and	 the	 curses	 are	 blessings,	 and	 the
misfortunes	can	be	 turned	 into	 fortunes.	 It	depends	only	on	one	 thing:	 if	you
know	 the	 key	 of	 awareness.	 Then	 you	 can	 turn	 everything	 into	 gold.	When
somebody	insults	you,	that	is	the	moment	to	keep	alert.	When	your	wife	looks
at	somebody	else	and	you	feel	hurt,	that	is	the	moment	to	keep	alert.	When	you
are	 feeling	sad,	gloomy,	depressed,	when	you	feel	 the	whole	world	 is	against
you,	that	is	the	moment	to	be	alert.	When	you	are	surrounded	by	a	dark	night,
that	 is	 the	moment	 to	 keep	 your	 light	 burning.	 And	 all	 those	 situations	will
prove	helpful	–	they	are	meant	for	it.
From	the	conscious	mind	to	the	superconscious	mind	is	all	yoga,	meditation,
prayer,	awareness.	Sub-superconscious	mind	is	an	integrated	phenomenon,	but
you	will	still	lose	it	sometimes.	Not	ordinarily	when	you	are	wakeful,	but	you
may	 lose	 it	 when	 you	 go	 to	 sleep.	 Sub-superconscious	 mind	 will	 help	 you
while	you	are	wakeful,	 and	 sometimes	even	 in	dreams	you	may	 remember	–
but	not	in	deep	sleep.	When	Krishna	says	in	the	Gita,	“The	yogi	is	awake	even
when	 the	whole	world	sleeps,”	he	 is	 indicating	 toward	a	higher	state	which	 I
call	 the	 sixth	 –	 the	 superconscious	mind.	 Then	 one	 remains	 alert	 even	while
asleep;	deep	asleep,	but	awareness	remains	there.	This	is	the	sixth.	And	out	of
this	sixth,	the	seventh	grows	spontaneously	–	you	have	not	to	do	anything	for
it.
That	seventh	I	again	call	no-mind,	to	make	the	circle	complete.	The	first	is
the	no-mind	of	a	rock	and	the	last	is	the	no-mind	of	a	God.	To	show	this	unity,
we	have	sculptured	Gods	in	stone.	To	show	this	unity,	this	circle	complete,	we
have	made	stone	statues	of	God	to	show	that	stone	is	 the	first	and	God	is	 the
last	 and	 both	 meet	 somewhere.	 Again,	 no-mind	 –	 call	 it	 soul,	 God,
enlightenment,	nirvana,	salvation,	or	whatsoever	you	choose	to	call	it.
These	are	the	seven	stages.	And	this	is	the	rainbow	a	man	is.
One	 thing	more,	 and	 that	 is:	 not	 a	 single	 color	 has	 to	 be	 denied.	 All	 the
colors	have	 to	be	absorbed	 in	 the	 rainbow,	and	all	 the	notes	of	music,	all	 the
seven	notes	of	music,	have	to	become	part	of	the	melody,	and	all	 these	seven
chakras	from	muladhar	to	sahasrar	have	to	become	a	unity.	It	 is	not	that	you
have	to	deny	some	chakras,	because	that	denied	chakra	will	never	allow	you	to
become	whole	–	and	one	who	is	not	whole	can	never	be	holy.	They	all	have	to
form	a	hierarchy,	a	unity;	they	all	have	to	belong	to	one	center.
A	real	man	of	religion	lives	the	whole	rainbow,	from	the	rock	to	God	–	from
no-mind	on	this	end	to	the	no-mind	on	the	other	end.	He	is	the	whole	spectrum.
He	lives	life	totally.	Nothing	is	denied,	everything	is	used.	Nothing	is	denied	at
all;	 if	something	feels	like	a	jarring	note,	 that	simply	means	you	have	not	yet
been	able	to	utilize	it.	It	can	be	used,	the	poison	can	become	medicinal	–	you
have	to	know	how	to	transform	it.	And	sometimes	the	nectar	can	be	poisonous
if	you	don’t	know	how	to	use	it.
If	you	know	how	to	use	anger,	you	will	see	anger	gives	you	a	sharpness	of
being	–	 just	as	 if	somebody	has	sharpened	a	sword.	Anger	 rightly	used	gives
you	a	sharpness,	a	radiance,	a	tremendous	vitality.	Sex	rightly	used	makes	you
so	full	of	 love	 that	you	can	go	on	sharing	with	all	and	sundry	and	 it	 is	never
exhausted.	Sex	rightly	used	gives	a	rebirth	to	yourself.	Ordinarily,	it	reproduces
children;	extraordinarily,	it	reproduces	your	innermost	being.
Let	 me	 tell	 you	 that	 whatever	 you	 have,	 all	 has	 to	 be	 used	 –	 nothing	 is
useless.	Never	throw	anything	away,	otherwise	you	will	repent	one	day.	All	has
to	be	used.	 Just	become	more	 insightful,	more	mindful;	become	more	aware,
and	 start	 looking	 into	 things	of	your	 inner	being	and	how	 to	bring	 them	 to	a
higher	harmony	–	that’s	all.	Right	now	you	are	a	crowd.	Right	now	you	are	not
an	 individual.	 You	 are	 not	 a	 rainbow	 –	 all	 the	 colors	 are	 falling	 in	 separate
dimensions,	moving	away	from	each	other;	they	don’t	have	a	center.	Right	now
you	 are	 a	 noise,	 not	 music	 –	 but	 remember,	 all	 the	 notes	 are	 present	 in	 the
noise.	Rearranged,	arranged	in	a	better,	aesthetic,	artistic	way,	they	will	become
beautiful	music.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	deep	aesthetic	look	into	your	being.
	
Chapter	3:	Understanding	the	Chakras	and	Kundalini
	
No	 theoretical	 knowledge	 ever	 helps	 and	 no	 anatomical	 visualization	 of
kundalini	 is	really	meaningful	for	meditation.	When	I	say	this,	I	do	not	mean
that	 there	is	nothing	like	kundalini	or	chakras.	Kundalini	 is	 there,	 the	chakras
are	 there,	 but	 no	 knowledge	 helps	 in	 any	 way.	 Rather,	 it	 can	 hinder.	 It	 can
become	a	barrier	for	so	many	reasons.
One	reason	is	that	any	knowledge	about	kundalini	or	about	esoteric	paths	of
bioenergy	 –	 the	 inner	 paths	 of	 elan	 vital	 –	 is	 generalized.	 It	 differs	 from
individual	to	individual;	the	root	is	not	going	to	be	the	same.	With	A	it	will	be
one	thing,	with	B	it	will	be	different,	with	C	it	will	be	different.	Your	inner	life
has	 an	 individuality,	 so	 when	 you	 acquire	 something	 through	 theoretical
knowledge	it	is	not	going	to	help	–	it	may	hinder	–	because	it	is	not	about	you.
It	cannot	be	about	you.	You	will	only	know	about	yourself	when	you	go	within.
There	 are	 chakras,	 but	 the	 number	 differs	with	 each	 individual.	 One	may
have	seven,	one	may	have	nine;	one	may	have	more,	one	may	have	less.	That	is
the	reason	why	so	many	different	traditions	have	developed.	Buddhists	talk	of
nine	 chakras,	 Hindus	 talk	 of	 seven,	 Tibetans	 talk	 of	 four	 –	 and	 they	 are	 all
right!
The	 root	of	kundalini,	 the	passage	 through	which	kundalini	passes,	 is	also
different	with	 each	 individual.	The	more	 you	 go	 in,	 the	more	 individual	 you
are.	For	instance,	your	face	is	the	most	individual	part	of	your	body,	and	in	the
face	the	eyes	are	even	more	individual.	The	face	is	more	alive	than	any	other
part	 of	 the	 body;	 that	 is	why	 it	 takes	 on	 an	 individuality.	You	may	 not	 have
noticed	 that	 with	 a	 particular	 age	 –	 particularly	with	 sexual	maturity	 –	 your
face	begins	 to	assume	a	shape	 that	will	continue,	more	or	 less,	 for	 the	whole
life.	Before	 sexual	maturity	 the	 face	 changes	much,	but	with	 sexual	maturity
your	individuality	is	fixed	and	given	a	pattern,	and	now	the	face	will	be	more
or	less	the	same.
The	eyes	are	even	more	alive	than	the	face,	and	they	are	so	individual	that
they	 change	 every	 moment.	 Unless	 one	 attains	 enlightenment,	 the	 eyes	 are
never	fixed.	Enlightenment	is	another	kind	of	maturity.
With	sexual	maturity	 the	face	becomes	fixed,	but	 there	 is	another	maturity
where	the	eyes	become	fixed.	You	cannot	see	any	change	in	Buddha’s	eyes:	his
body	will	grow	old,	he	will	die,	but	his	eyes	will	continue	to	be	the	same.	That
has	been	one	of	the	indications.	When	someone	attains	nirvana,	the	eyes	are	the
only	door	by	which	outsiders	can	know	whether	the	man	has	really	attained	it.
Now	the	eyes	never	change.	Everything	changes,	but	the	eyes	remain	the	same.
Eyes	are	expressive	of	the	inner	world.
But	kundalini	is	still	deeper.
No	 theoretical	 knowledge	 is	 helpful.	 When	 you	 have	 some	 theoretical
knowledge,	you	begin	to	impose	it	on	yourself.	You	begin	to	visualize	things	to
be	 the	 way	 you	 have	 been	 taught,	 but	 they	 may	 not	 correspond	 to	 your
individual	situation.	Then	much	confusion	is	created.
One	 has	 to	 feel	 the	 chakras,	 not	 know	about	 them.	You	 have	 to	 feel;	 you
have	to	send	feelers	inside	yourself.	Only	when	you	feel	your	chakras,	and	your
kundalini	 and	 its	 passage,	 is	 it	 helpful;	 otherwise,	 it	 is	 not	 helpful.	 In	 fact,
knowledge	 has	 been	 very	 destructive	 as	 far	 as	 the	 inner	world	 is	 concerned.
The	more	 knowledge	 gained,	 the	 less	 the	 possibility	 of	 feeling	 the	 real,	 the
authentic,	things.
You	begin	to	impose	what	you	know	upon	yourself.	If	someone	says,	“Here
is	the	chakra,	here	is	the	center,”	then	you	begin	to	visualize	your	chakra	at	that
spot;	 and	 it	may	not	 be	 there	 at	 all.	Then	you	will	 create	 imaginary	 chakras.
You	can	create;	 the	mind	has	the	capacity.	You	can	create	 imaginary	chakras,
and	 then,	 because	 of	 your	 imagination,	 a	 flow	 will	 begin	 that	 will	 not	 be
kundalini	 but	 will	 be	 simple	 imagination	 –	 a	 completely	 illusory,	 dreamlike
phenomenon.
Once	you	can	visualize	centers	and	can	create	an	imaginary	kundalini,	then
you	 can	 create	 everything.	 Then	 imaginary	 experiences	will	 follow,	 and	 you
will	develop	a	very	false	world	inside	you.	The	world	that	is	without	is	illusory,
but	not	as	illusory	as	the	one	you	can	create	inside.
All	that	is	within	is	not	necessarily	real	or	true,	because	imagination	is	also
within,	 dreams	 are	 also	 within.	 The	 mind	 has	 a	 faculty	 –	 a	 very	 powerful
faculty	 –	 to	 dream,	 to	 create	 illusions,	 to	 project.	 That	 is	 why	 it	 is	 good	 to
proceed	in	meditation	completely	unaware	of	kundalini,	of	the	chakras.	If	you
stumble	 upon	 them,	 then	 it	 is	 good.	You	may	 come	 to	 feel	 something;	 only
then,	 ask.	You	may	 begin	 to	 feel	 a	 chakra	working,	 but	 let	 the	 feeling	 come
first.	 You	 may	 feel	 energy	 rising	 up,	 but	 let	 the	 feeling	 come	 first.	 Do	 not
imagine,	do	not	think	about	it,	do	not	make	any	intellectual	effort	to	understand
beforehand;	 no	 pre-notion	 is	 needed.	 Not	 only	 is	 it	 not	 needed,	 but	 it	 is
positively	harmful.
And	 another	 thing:	 kundalini	 and	 the	 chakras	 do	 not	 belong	 to	 your
anatomy,	to	your	physiology.	The	chakras	and	kundalini	belong	to	your	subtle
body,	 to	 your	 sukshma	 sharira,	 not	 to	 this	 body,	 the	 gross	 body.	 Of	 course,
there	are	corresponding	spots.	The	chakras	are	part	of	your	sukshma	sharira,
but	your	physiology	and	anatomy	have	 spots	 that	 correspond	 to	 them.	 If	you
feel	an	inner	chakra,	only	then	can	you	feel	the	corresponding	spot;	otherwise
you	can	dissect	the	whole	body,	but	nothing	like	chakras	will	be	found.
All	 the	 talk	and	all	 the	so-called	evidence	and	all	 the	scientific	claims	that
your	gross	body	has	something	like	kundalini	and	chakras	is	nonsense,	absolute
nonsense.	There	are	corresponding	spots,	but	those	spots	can	only	be	felt	when
you	feel	the	real	chakras.	With	the	dissection	of	your	gross	body,	nothing	can
be	found;	there	is	nothing.	So	the	question	is	not	of	anatomy.
One	more	 thing:	 it	 is	 not	 necessary	 to	 pass	 through	 the	 chakras.	 It	 is	 not
necessary;	one	can	just	bypass	them.	It	is	also	not	necessary	that	you	will	feel
kundalini	before	enlightenment.	The	phenomenon	is	very	different	from	what
you	may	think.	Kundalini	is	not	felt	because	it	is	rising;	kundalini	is	only	felt	if
you	do	not	 have	 a	very	 clear	 passage.	 If	 the	passage	 is	 completely	 clear-cut,
then	the	energy	flows	but	you	cannot	feel	it.
You	feel	it	when	there	is	something	there	that	resists	the	flow.	If	the	energy
flows	upward	and	you	have	blocks	in	the	passage,	only	then	do	you	feel	it.	So
the	person	who	feels	more	kundalini	is	really	blocked:	there	are	many	blocks	in
the	passage,	so	the	kundalini	cannot	flow.
When	there	is	resistance,	 then	the	kundalini	 is	felt.	You	cannot	feel	energy
directly	unless	there	is	resistance.	If	I	move	my	hand	and	there	is	no	resistance,
the	movement	will	not	be	felt.	The	movement	is	felt	because	the	air	resists,	but
it	 is	 not	 felt	 as	much	 as	when	 a	 stone	 resists;	 then	 I	will	 feel	 the	movement
more.	And	in	a	vacuum	I	will	not	feel	the	movement	at	all	–	so	it	is	relative.
Buddha	never	talked	about	kundalini.	It	is	not	that	there	was	no	kundalini	in
his	body,	but	 the	passage	was	 so	clear	 that	 there	was	no	 resistance.	Thus,	he
never	 felt	 it.	Mahavira	 never	 talked	 about	 kundalini.	 Because	 of	 this,	 a	 very
false	notion	was	created,	and	then	Jainas,	who	followed	Mahavira,	thought	that
kundalini	 was	 all	 nonsense,	 that	 there	 was	 nothing	 like	 it.	 Thus,	 because
Mahavira	himself	did	not	feel	kundalini,	twenty-five	centuries	of	Jaina	tradition
has	continued	to	deny	it,	claiming	it	does	not	exist.	But	Mahavira’s	reason	for
not	 talking	 about	 it	 was	 very	 different.	 Because	 there	were	 no	 blocks	 in	 his
body,	he	never	felt	it.
So	 it	 is	not	necessary	 for	you	 to	 feel	kundalini.	You	may	not	 feel	 it	at	all.
And	if	you	do	not	feel	kundalini,	then	you	will	bypass	the	chakras,	because	the
working	of	the	chakras	is	needed	only	to	break	the	blocks.	Otherwise,	they	are
not	needed.
When	there	is	a	block,	and	the	kundalini	is	blocked,	then	the	nearby	chakra
begins	 to	move	 because	 of	 the	 blocked	 kundalini.	 It	 becomes	 dynamic.	 The
chakra	begins	 to	move	because	of	 the	blocked	kundalini	and	 it	moves	so	fast
that,	because	of	the	movement,	a	particular	energy	is	created	which	breaks	the
block.
If	the	passage	is	clear,	no	chakra	is	needed	and	you	will	never	feel	anything.
Really,	the	existence	of	chakras	is	just	to	help	you.	If	kundalini	is	blocked,	then
the	help	is	just	nearby.	Some	chakra	will	take	the	energy	that	is	being	blocked.
If	 the	 energy	 cannot	move	 further	 it	 will	 fall	 back.	 Before	 it	 falls	 back,	 the
chakra	will	absorb	 the	energy	completely,	and	 the	kundalini	will	move	 in	 the
chakra.	Through	movement	 the	 energy	becomes	more	vital,	 it	 becomes	more
alive,	 and	when	 it	 again	 comes	 to	 the	 block	 it	 can	 break	 it.	 So	 it	 is	 just	 an
arrangement,	a	help.
If	kundalini	moves	and	there	are	no	blocks,	then	you	will	never	feel	any	of
the	 chakras.	That	 is	why	 someone	may	 feel	 nine	 chakras,	 someone	 else	may
feel	ten	chakras,	and	someone	else	may	feel	only	three	or	four,	or	one,	or	none.
It	 depends.	 In	 actual	 fact,	 there	 are	 infinite	 chakras	 and	 at	 every	movement,
every	step	of	the	kundalini,	a	chakra	is	by	the	side	to	help.	If	the	help	is	needed,
it	can	be	given.
That	 is	 why	 I	 insist	 that	 a	 theoretical	 acquaintance	 is	 not	 helpful.	 And
meditation	 as	 such	 is	 not	 really	 concerned	with	 kundalini	 at	 all.	 If	 kundalini
comes,	 that	 is	 another	 thing	 –	 but	 meditation	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 it.
Meditation	 can	 be	 explained	without	 even	mentioning	 kundalini;	 there	 is	 no
need.	And	by	mentioning	kundalini	it	creates	even	more	conflicts	to	explaining
meditation.	Meditation	 can	 be	 explained	 directly;	 you	 need	 not	 bother	 about
chakras,	you	begin	with	meditation.	If	the	passage	is	blocked	you	may	come	to
feel	kundalini,	and	chakras	will	be	there,	but	that	is	completely	nonvoluntary.
You	must	remember	that	it	is	nonvoluntary;	your	volition	is	not	needed	at	all.
The	deeper	the	path,	the	more	nonvoluntary.	I	can	move	my	hand	–	this	is	a
voluntary	 path	 –	 but	 I	 cannot	move	my	 blood.	 I	 can	 try.	Years	 and	 years	 of
training	can	make	a	person	capable	of	making	the	blood	circulation	voluntary	–
hatha	yoga	can	do	 that;	 it	has	been	done,	 it	 is	not	 impossible,	but	 it	 is	 futile.
Thirty	 years	 of	 training	 just	 to	 control	 the	 movement	 of	 the	 blood	 is
meaningless	 and	 stupid	 because	 with	 the	 control	 comes	 nothing.	 The	 blood
circulation	is	nonvoluntary;	your	will	 is	not	needed.	You	take	in	food	and	the
moment	 it	 goes	 in,	 your	 will	 is	 not	 needed:	 the	 body	 machinery,	 the	 body
mechanism,	 has	 taken	 over,	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 doing	 whatever	 is	 needed.	 Your
sleep	is	not	voluntary,	your	birth	is	not	voluntary,	your	death	is	not	voluntary.
These	are	nonvoluntary	mechanisms.
Kundalini	 is	 still	 deeper,	 deeper	 than	 your	 death,	 deeper	 than	 your	 birth,
deeper	than	your	blood,	because	kundalini	is	a	circulation	of	your	second	body.
Blood	is	the	circulation	of	your	physiological	body;	kundalini	is	the	circulation
of	your	etheric	body.	It	is	absolutely	nonvoluntary;	even	a	hatha	yogi	cannot	do
anything	with	it	voluntarily.
One	has	to	go	into	meditation,	then	the	energy	begins	to	move.	The	part	that
is	 to	 be	 done	 by	 you	 is	meditation.	 If	 you	 are	 deeply	 in	 in	 it,	 then	 the	 inner
energy	begins	to	move	upward,	and	you	will	feel	the	change	of	flow.	It	will	be
felt	in	so	many	ways:	the	change	can	even	be	known	physiologically.
For	example,	ordinarily,	biologically,	it	is	a	sign	of	good	health	for	your	feet
to	be	warm	and	your	head	to	be	cool.	Biologically	 it	 is	a	healthy	sign.	When
the	 reverse	 occurs	 –	 the	 feet	 become	 cool	 and	 the	 head	 becomes	 warm	 –	 a
person	is	ill.	But	the	same	thing	happens	when	the	kundalini	flows	upward:	the
feet	become	cool.
Really,	the	warmth	in	the	feet	is	nothing	but	sex	energy	flowing	downward.
The	moment	the	vital	energy,	the	kundalini,	begins	to	flow	upward,	sex	energy
follows.	It	begins	to	flow	upward:	the	feet	become	cool	and	the	head	becomes
warm.	 Biologically	 it	 is	 better	 for	 the	 feet	 to	 be	 warmer	 than	 the	 head,	 but
spiritually	it	is	healthier	for	the	feet	to	be	cooler	because	this	is	a	sign	that	the
energy	is	flowing	upward.
Many	diseases	may	begin	to	occur	once	the	energy	begins	to	flow	upward,
because	biologically	you	have	disturbed	the	whole	organism.	Buddha	died	very
ill,	Mahavira	 died	 very	 ill,	 Raman	Maharshi	 died	with	 cancer;	 Ramakrishna
died	 with	 cancer.	 And	 the	 reason	 is	 that	 the	 whole	 biological	 system	 is
disturbed.	Many	other	reasons	are	given,	but	they	are	nonsense.
Jainas	 have	 created	 many	 stories	 because	 they	 could	 not	 conceive	 that
Mahavira	 could	 have	 been	 ill.	 For	 me,	 the	 contrary	 is	 the	 case:	 I	 cannot
conceive	how	he	could	have	been	completely	healthy.	He	couldn’t	be,	because
this	was	going	to	be	his	last	birth,	and	the	whole	biological	system	had	to	break
down.	A	system	that	had	been	continuous	for	millennia	had	to	break	down.	He
could	not	be	healthy;	in	the	end	he	had	to	be	very	ill.	And	he	was!	But	it	was
very	difficult	for	his	followers	to	conceive	that	Mahavira	was	ill.
There	 was	 only	 one	 explanation	 for	 illness	 in	 those	 days.	 If	 you	 were
suffering	from	a	particular	disease,	it	meant	your	karmas	your	past	deeds,	had
been	bad.	If	Mahavira	was	suffering	from	a	disease,	then	it	would	have	meant
that	 he	 was	 still	 under	 his	 karmic	 influence.	 This	 could	 not	 be	 so,	 so	 an
ingenious	 story	was	 invented:	 that	Goshalak,	 a	 competitor	 of	Mahavira,	was
using	evil	forces	against	him.	But	this	was	not	the	case	at	all.
The	biological,	natural	flow	is	downward;	the	spiritual	flow	is	upward.	And
the	whole	organism	is	meant	for	a	downward	flow.
You	may	begin	to	feel	many	changes	in	the	body,	but	the	first	changes	will
come	in	the	subtle	body.	Meditation	is	 just	 the	means	to	create	a	bridge	from
the	 gross	 to	 the	 subtle.	When	 I	 say	meditation,	 I	mean	 only	 that:	 if	 you	 can
jump	out	of	your	gross	body	–	that	is	what	is	meant	by	meditation.	But	to	take
this	jump	you	will	need	the	help	of	your	gross	body;	you	will	have	to	use	it	as	a
stepping-stone.
From	any	extreme	point,	you	can	 take	 the	 jump.	Fasting	has	been	used	 to
take	one	to	an	extreme.	With	long,	continuous	fasting,	you	come	to	the	verge.
The	human	body	can	ordinarily	sustain	a	ninety-day	fast,	but	then,	the	moment
the	 body	 is	 completely	 exhausted,	 the	 moment	 the	 reservoir	 that	 has	 been
accumulated	for	emergencies	has	been	depleted	–	at	 that	moment,	one	of	two
things	 is	 possible.	 If	 you	 do	 nothing,	 death	 may	 occur,	 but	 if	 you	 use	 this
moment	for	meditation,	the	jump	may	occur.
If	you	do	not	do	anything,	if	you	just	go	on	fasting,	death	may	occur.	Then	it
will	 be	 suicide.	Mahavira,	 who	 experimented	more	 deeply	 with	 fasting	 than
anyone	 else	 in	 the	 whole	 history	 of	 human	 evolution,	 is	 the	 only	 man	 who
allowed	 his	 followers	 a	 spiritual	 suicide.	 He	 called	 it	 santhara:	 that	 on-the-
verge	point	when	both	things	are	possible.	In	a	single	moment,	you	may	either
die	 or	 you	 can	 jump.	 If	 you	 use	 a	 technique,	 you	 can	 jump;	 then,	Mahavira
says,	 it	 is	 not	 suicide,	 but	 a	very	great	 spiritual	 explosion.	Mahavira	was	 the
only	man	 –	 the	 only	 one	 –	who	 has	 said	 that	 if	 you	 have	 the	 courage,	 even
suicide	can	be	used	for	your	spiritual	progress.
From	any	point	on	the	verge,	the	jump	is	possible.	Sufis	have	used	dancing.
A	moment	comes	in	dancing	when	you	begin	to	feel	unearthly.	With	a	real	Sufi
dancer,	even	the	audience	begins	to	feel	unearthly.	Through	body	movements,
rhythmic	movements,	 the	dancer	soon	begins	 to	 feel	 that	he	 is	different	 from
the	body,	separate	from	the	body.	One	has	 to	begin	the	movement	but	soon	a
nonvoluntary	mechanism	of	the	body	takes	over.
You	begin,	but	 if	 the	end	 is	 also	yours	 then	 the	dancing	was	 just	ordinary
dancing.	But	if	you	begin	and	by	the	end	you	feel	as	if	somewhere	in	between
the	dancing	was	taken	over	by	a	nonvoluntary	mechanism,	then	it	has	become	a
dervish	 dance.	 You	 move	 so	 fast	 that	 the	 body	 shakes	 and	 becomes
nonvoluntary.
That	is	the	point	where	you	can	go	crazy	or	you	can	jump.	You	may	go	mad,
because	a	nonvoluntary	mechanism	has	taken	over	your	body	movement.	It	is
beyond	your	control:	you	cannot	do	anything.	You	may	just	go	mad	and	never
be	able	to	come	back	again	from	this	nonvoluntary	movement.	This	is	the	point
where	 there	 is	 either	 madness	 or,	 if	 you	 know	 the	 technique	 to	 jump,
meditation.
That	is	why	Sufis	have	always	been	known	as	mad	people.	They	have	been
known	as	mad.	Ordinarily,	they	are	mad.	There	is	also	a	sect	in	Bengal	that	is
just	like	the	Sufis:	Baul	fakirs.	They	move	from	village	to	village	dancing	and
singing.	The	very	word	baul	means	bawla,	mad.	They	are	people	who	are	mad.
Madness	 happens	 many	 times,	 but	 if	 you	 know	 the	 technique,	 then
meditation	 can	 happen.	 It	 always	 happens	 on	 the	 verge;	 that	 is	why	mystics
have	always	used	the	term	“the	sword’s	edge.”	Either	madness	may	happen	or
meditation	may	happen,	and	every	method	uses	your	body	as	a	sword’s	edge
from	which	either	one	or	the	other	is	possible.
Then	what	 is	 the	 technique	 to	 jump	 into	meditation?	 I	 have	 talked	 about
two:	fasting	and	dancing.	All	 techniques	of	meditation	are	 to	push	you	to	 the
verge	 where	 you	 can	 take	 the	 jump,	 but	 the	 jump	 itself	 can	 be	 taken	 only
through	a	very	simple,	very	non-methodical	method.
If	 you	 can	 be	 aware	 at	 the	 very	moment	when	 fasting	 has	 led	 you	 to	 the
precipice	of	death,	if	you	can	be	aware	at	the	moment	when	death	is	going	to
set	 in,	 if	 you	 can	be	 aware,	 then	 there	 is	 no	death.	And	not	 only	 is	 there	 no
death	 this	 time,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 death	 forever.	You	 have	 jumped!	When	 the
moment	is	so	intense	that	you	know	in	one	second	it	will	be	beyond	you,	when
you	know	that	should	a	second	be	lost	you	will	not	be	able	to	come	back	again,
be	aware	–	and	then	jump.	Awareness	is	the	method.	And	because	awareness	is
the	method,	Zen	people	say	that	there	is	no	method.	Awareness	is	not	a	method
at	all.	That	is	why	Krishnamurti	will	go	on	saying	that	there	is	no	method.
Of	course,	awareness	is	not	really	a	method	at	all;	but	I	still	call	it	a	method
because	 if	 you	 cannot	 be	 aware,	 then	 at	 the	 exact	 moment	 that	 the	 jump	 is
possible,	you	will	be	lost.	So	if	someone	says,	“Only	awareness	will	do,”	that
may	be	true	for	one	out	of	ten	thousand	people,	but	that	one	will	be	one	who
has	come	to	the	point	where	either	madness	is	possible	or	death	is	possible.	He
has	come	to	that	point	anyway.
And	with	 the	 others,	 the	majority	 of	 people,	 just	 talking	 about	 awareness
will	not	do.	First,	they	must	be	trained.	To	be	aware	in	ordinary	situations	will
not	do.	And	you	cannot	be	aware	in	ordinary	situations.	The	mind’s	stupidity
has	 such	 a	 long	 history	 –	 the	 lethargy	 of	 it,	 the	 laziness	 of	 it,	 the
unconsciousness	 of	 it,	 has	 been	 going	 on	 for	 so	 long,	 that	 just	 by	 hearing
Krishnamurti	or	me	or	anyone	else	you	can	never	hope	to	be	aware.	And	it	will
be	 difficult	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 those	 same	 things	 that	 you	 have	 done	 without
awareness	so	many	times.
You	 have	 come	 to	 your	 office	 completely	 unaware	 that	 you	 have	 been
moving:	 you	 have	 turned,	 you	 have	walked,	 you	 have	 opened	 the	 door.	 For
your	whole	 life	 you	 have	 been	 doing	 it.	 Now	 it	 has	 become	 a	 nonvoluntary
mechanism;	it	has	been	removed	from	your	consciousness	completely.
Then	Krishnamurti	says,	“Be	aware	when	you	are	walking.”	But	you	have
been	walking	without	ever	being	aware.	The	habit	has	set	 in	so	deeply,	 it	has
become	a	part	of	the	bones	and	blood;	now	it	is	very	difficult.
You	 can	 only	 be	 aware	 in	 emergencies,	 in	 sudden	 emergencies.	 Someone
puts	 a	gun	 to	your	chest:	you	can	be	aware	because	 it	 is	 a	 situation	 that	you
have	never	practiced.	But	if	you	are	familiar	with	the	situation,	you	will	not	be
aware	at	all.
Fasting	is	to	create	an	emergency,	and	such	an	emergency	as	you	have	never
known.	So	one	who	has	been	practicing	fasting	may	not	be	helped	through	it;
he	will	need	longer	periods	 to	fast.	Or,	 if	you	have	never	danced,	you	can	be
helped	 easily	 through	 dancing;	 but	 if	 you	 are	 an	 expert	 dancer,	 Sufi	 dervish
dancing	will	not	do.	It	will	not	do	at	all	because	you	are	so	perfect,	so	efficient,
and	efficiency	means	that	the	thing	is	now	being	done	by	the	nonvoluntary	part
of	the	mind.	Efficiency	always	means	that.
That	 is	 why	 one	 hundred	 and	 twelve	 methods	 of	 meditation	 have	 been
developed.	One	may	not	do	for	you;	another	may.	And	the	one	which	will	be
most	helpful	is	the	one	which	is	completely	unknown	to	you.	If	you	have	never
been	 trained	 in	 a	 particular	method	 at	 all,	 then	 an	 emergency	 is	 created	very
soon.	And	in	that	emergency,	be	aware!
So	be	concerned	with	meditation	and	not	with	kundalini.	And	when	you	are
aware,	things	will	begin	to	happen	in	you.	For	the	first	time	you	will	become
aware	 of	 an	 inner	 world	 that	 is	 greater,	 vaster,	 more	 extensive	 than	 the
universe;	energies	unknown,	completely	unknown,	will	begin	 to	 flow	 in	you.
Phenomena	 never	 heard	 of,	 never	 imagined,	 or	 dreamed	 of,	 will	 begin	 to
happen.	But	with	each	person	they	differ,	so	it	is	good	not	to	talk	about	them.
	
Chapter	4:	Seven	Subtle	Bodies	and	the	Energy	of	Breath
	
Prana	is	energy	–	the	living	energy	in	us,	the	life	in	us.	This	life	manifests
itself,	 as	 far	 as	 the	 physical	 body	 is	 concerned,	 as	 the	 incoming	 and	 the
outgoing	breath.	These	are	two	opposite	things;	we	take	them	as	one.	We	say
“breathing”	 –	 but	 breathing	 has	 two	 polarities:	 the	 incoming	 breath	 and	 the
outgoing	 breath.	 Every	 energy	 has	 polarities,	 every	 energy	 exists	 in	 two
opposite	poles.	It	cannot	exist	otherwise.	The	opposite	poles,	with	their	tension
and	harmony,	create	energy	–	just	like	magnetic	poles.
The	 incoming	breath	 is	quite	contrary	 to	 the	outgoing,	and	 the	outgoing	 is
quite	 contrary	 to	 the	 incoming.	 In	a	 single	moment,	 the	 incoming	 is	 just	 like
birth	 and	 the	 outgoing	 is	 just	 like	 death.	 In	 a	 single	moment	 both	 things	 are
happening:	when	you	take	breath	in,	you	are	born;	when	you	throw	breath	out,
you	die.	In	a	single	moment	there	is	birth	and	death.	This	polarity	is	life	energy
coming	up,	going	down.
In	 the	 physical	 body,	 life	 energy	 takes	 this	 manifestation.	 Life	 energy	 is
born,	and	after	seventy	years	it	dies.	That	too	is	a	greater	manifestation	of	the
same	phenomenon:	the	incoming	breath	and	the	outgoing	breath	–	the	day	and
the	night.
In	all	of	the	seven	bodies	–	the	physical,	the	etheric,	 the	astral,	 the	mental,
the	 spiritual,	 the	 cosmic,	 and	 the	 nirvanic,	 there	 will	 be	 a	 corresponding
incoming	and	outgoing	phenomenon.
As	 far	 as	 the	 mental	 body	 is	 concerned,	 thought	 coming	 in	 and	 thought
going	 out	 is	 the	 same	 kind	 of	 phenomenon	 as	 breath	 coming	 in	 and	 breath
going	out.	Every	moment	 a	 thought	 comes	 in	 your	mind	 and	 a	 thought	 goes
out.	Thought	 itself	 is	energy.	 In	 the	mental	body,	 the	energy	manifests	as	 the
coming	of	thought	and	the	going	of	thought;	in	the	physical	body,	it	manifests
as	breath	coming	and	breath	going.	That	is	why	you	can	change	your	thinking
with	breathing.	There	is	a	correspondence.
If	 you	 stop	 your	 breath	 from	 coming	 in,	 thought	 will	 be	 stopped	 from
coming	 in.	 Stop	 your	 breath	 in	 your	 physical	 body	 and	 in	 the	 mental	 body
thought	will	stop.	And	as	the	physical	body	becomes	uneasy,	your	mental	body
will	become	uneasy.	The	physical	body	will	long	to	breathe	in;	the	mental	body
will	long	to	take	in	thought.
Just	 as	 breath	 is	 taken	 in	 from	 the	 outside	 and	 the	 air	 exists	 outside	 you,
likewise	an	ocean	of	thought	exists	outside	you.	Thought	comes	in,	and	thought
goes	 out.	 Your	 breath	 can	 become	 my	 breath	 at	 another	 moment	 and	 your
thought	 can	become	my	 thought.	Every	 time	you	 throw	your	breath	out,	 you
are	likewise	throwing	your	thought	out.	Just	as	air	exists,	so	thought	exists;	just
as	air	can	be	contaminated,	so	thought	can	be	contaminated;	just	as	air	can	be
impure,	so	thought	can	be	impure.
The	breath	itself	is	not	prana.	Prana	means	the	vital	energy	that	manifests
itself	by	these	polarities	of	coming	in	and	going	out.	The	energy	that	takes	the
breath	in	is	prana,	not	the	breath	itself.	The	energy	that	takes	breath	in,	which
asserts	it,	the	energy	that	is	taking	the	breath	in	and	throwing	it	out,	is	prana.
The	energy	that	takes	thought	in	and	throws	thought	out,	that	energy	too	is
prana.	In	all	of	the	seven	bodies,	this	process	exists.	I	am	only	talking	now	of
the	 physical	 and	 the	 mental,	 because	 these	 two	 are	 known	 to	 us;	 we	 can
understand	them	easily.	But	in	every	layer	of	your	being	the	same	thing	exists.
Your	 second	 body,	 the	 etheric	 body,	 has	 its	 own	 incoming	 and	 outgoing
process.	You	will	feel	this	process	in	each	of	the	seven	bodies,	but	you	will	feel
it	to	be	just	like	the	incoming	breath	and	outgoing	breath,	because	you	are	only
acquainted	 with	 your	 physical	 body	 and	 its	 prana.	 Then	 you	 will	 always
misunderstand.
Whenever	any	feeling	comes	to	you	of	another	body	or	its	prana,	you	will
first	understand	it	as	the	coming	in	and	the	going	out	of	breath,	because	this	is
the	 only	 experience	 you	 know.	 You	 have	 only	 known	 this	 manifestation	 of
prana,	 of	 vital	 energy.	 But	 on	 the	 etheric	 plane	 there	 is	 neither	 breath	 nor
thought,	but	influence	–	simply	influence	coming	in	and	going	out.
You	 come	 into	 contact	with	 somebody	without	 having	known	him	before.
He	has	not	even	talked	with	you,	but	something	about	him	comes	in.	You	have
either	taken	him	in	or	thrown	him	out.	There	is	a	subtle	influence:	you	may	call
it	love	or	you	may	call	it	hatred	–	the	attractive	or	the	repulsive.
When	 you	 are	 repulsed	 or	 attracted,	 it	 is	 your	 second	 body.	 And	 every
moment	 the	 process	 is	 going	 on;	 it	 never	 stops.	 You	 are	 always	 taking
influences	in	and	then	throwing	them	out.	The	other	pole	will	always	be	there.
If	you	have	loved	someone,	then	in	a	certain	moment	you	will	be	repulsed.	If
you	have	 loved	someone	 the	breath	has	been	 taken	 in:	now	it	will	be	 thrown
out	and	you	will	be	repulsed.	So	every	moment	of	love	will	be	followed	by	a
moment	of	repulsion.
The	vital	 energy	exists	 in	polarities.	 It	 never	 exists	 at	 one	pole.	 It	 cannot!
And	whenever	you	try	to	make	it	do	so,	you	try	the	impossible.
You	cannot	love	someone	without	hating	him	at	some	time.	The	hatred	will
be	 there	 because	 the	 vital	 force	 cannot	 exist	 at	 a	 single	 pole.	 It	 exists	 at
opposite	polarities,	so	a	friend	is	bound	to	be	an	enemy	–	and	this	will	go	on.
This	coming	in	and	going	out	will	happen	up	to	the	seventh	body.	No	body	can
exist	without	this	process	–	this	coming	in	and	going	out.	It	cannot,	just	as	the
physical	body	cannot	exist	without	the	incoming	and	outgoing	breath.
As	far	as	the	physical	body	is	concerned,	we	never	take	these	two	things	as
opposites,	so	we	are	not	disturbed	about	it.	Life	makes	no	distinction	between
the	 incoming	 breath	 and	 the	 outgoing	 breath.	 There	 is	 no	moral	 distinction.
There	is	nothing	to	be	chosen;	both	are	the	same.	The	phenomenon	is	natural.
But	 as	 far	 as	 the	 second	 body	 is	 concerned,	 hatred	must	 not	 be	 there	 and
love	must	be	there.	Then	you	have	begun	to	choose.	You	have	begun	to	choose,
and	 this	 choice	 will	 create	 disturbances.	 That	 is	 why	 the	 physical	 body	 is
ordinarily	more	healthy	than	the	second,	the	etheric,	body.	The	etheric	body	is
always	in	conflict	because	moral	choosing	has	made	a	hell	out	of	it.
When	 love	 comes	 to	 you,	 you	 feel	well-being,	 but	when	 hatred	 comes	 to
you,	you	 feel	diseased.	But	 it	 is	bound	 to	come	–	 so	a	person	who	knows,	 a
person	who	has	understood	the	polarities,	is	not	disappointed	when	it	comes.	A
person	who	has	known	the	polarities	is	at	ease,	at	equilibrium.	He	knows	it	is
bound	to	happen,	so	he	neither	tries	to	love	when	he	is	not	loving	nor	does	he
create	any	hatred.	Things	come	and	go:	he	is	not	attracted	to	the	incoming	nor
repulsed	by	 the	outgoing.	He	 is	 just	a	witness.	He	says,	“It	 is	 just	 like	breath
coming	in	and	breath	going	out.”
The	 Buddhist	 meditation	 method	 of	 Anapanasati	 Yoga	 is	 concerned	 with
this.	It	says	to	just	be	a	witness	to	your	incoming	and	outgoing	breath.	Just	be	a
witness,	and	begin	from	the	physical	body.	The	other	six	bodies	are	not	talked
about	in	Anapanasati	because	they	will	come	by	themselves,	by	and	by.
The	more	you	become	acquainted	with	 this	polarity	–	with	 this	dying	and
living	 simultaneously,	with	 this	 simultaneous	birth	 and	death	–	 the	more	you
will	become	aware	of	the	second	body.	Toward	hatred,	then,	Buddha	says,	have
upeksha.	Be	indifferent.	Whether	it	is	hatred	or	it	is	love,	be	indifferent.	And	do
not	be	attached	to	anyone	because	if	you	are	attached,	what	will	happen	to	the
other	pole?	Then	you	will	be	at	a	“dis-ease.”	Disease	will	be	there;	you	will	not
be	at	ease.
Buddha	says,	“The	coming	of	the	beloved	one	is	welcomed,	but	the	going	of
the	beloved	one	is	wept	over.	The	meeting	with	the	one	who	is	repulsive	is	a
misery,	and	the	departing	of	a	repulsive	one	is	bliss.	But	if	you	go	on	dividing
yourself	into	these	polarities,	you	will	be	in	hell,	living	in	a	hell.”
If	 you	 just	 become	 a	witness	 to	 these	 polarities,	 then	 you	 say,	 “This	 is	 a
natural	phenomenon.	It	is	natural	to	the	body	concerned”	–	that	is,	one	of	the
seven	bodies.	“The	body	exists	because	of	this;	otherwise,	it	cannot	exist.”	And
the	moment	you	become	aware	of	it,	you	transcend	the	body.	If	you	transcend
your	 first	body,	 then	you	become	aware	of	 the	second.	 If	you	 transcend	your
second	body,	then	you	become	aware	of	the	third.
Witnessing	 is	always	beyond	 life	and	death.	The	breath	coming	 in	and	 the
breath	 going	 out	 are	 two	 things,	 and	 if	 you	 become	 a	witness,	 then	 you	 are
neither.	 Then	 a	 third	 force	 has	 come	 into	 being.	 Now	 you	 are	 not	 the
manifestations	 of	 prana	 in	 the	 physical	 body:	 now	 you	 are	 the	 prana,	 the
witness.	Now	you	see	that	life	manifests	on	the	physical	level	because	of	this
polarity,	and	if	this	polarity	stops,	the	physical	body	will	not	be	there,	it	cannot
exist.	It	needs	tension	to	exist	–	this	constant	tension	of	coming	and	going,	this
constant	tension	of	birth	and	death.	It	exists	because	of	this.	Every	moment	it
moves	between	the	two	poles;	otherwise,	it	would	not	exist.
In	the	second	body,	“love	and	hate”	is	the	basic	polarity.	It	is	manifested	in
so	 many	 ways.	 The	 basic	 polarity	 is	 this	 liking	 and	 disliking,	 and	 every
moment	 your	 liking	 becomes	 disliking	 and	 your	 disliking	 becomes	 liking	 –
every	moment!	But	you	never	 see	 it.	When	your	 liking	becomes	disliking,	 if
you	suppress	your	disliking	and	continue	fooling	yourself	that	you	will	go	on
liking	the	same	things	always,	you	are	only	doubly	fooling	yourself.	And	if	you
dislike	 something,	 you	 go	 on	 disliking	 it,	 never	 allowing	 yourself	 to	 see	 the
moments	when	you	have	 liked	 it.	We	suppress	our	 love	 for	our	enemies,	and
we	suppress	our	hatred	for	our	friends.	We	are	suppressing.	We	allow	only	one
movement,	only	one	pole,	but	because	it	comes	back	again,	we	are	at	ease.	It
returns,	 so	we	 are	 at	 ease.	 But	 it	 is	 discontinuous;	 it	 is	 never	 continuous.	 It
never	can	be.
The	vital	force	manifests	itself	as	like	and	dislike	in	the	second	body.	But	it
is	 just	 like	breath:	 there	 is	no	difference.	 Influence	 is	 the	medium	here;	air	 is
the	medium	in	 the	physical	body.	The	second	body	lives	 in	an	atmosphere	of
influences.	 It	 is	not	 simply	 that	 someone	comes	 in	contact	with	you	and	you
begin	to	like	him.	Even	if	no	one	comes	in	and	you	are	alone	in	the	room,	you
will	be	liking–disliking,	liking–disliking.	It	will	make	no	difference:	the	liking
and	disliking	will	go	on	continuously	alternating.
It	is	through	this	polarity	that	the	etheric	body	exists;	it	is	its	breath.	If	you
become	a	witness	to	it,	then	you	can	just	laugh.	Then	there	is	no	enemy	and	no
friend.	Then	you	know	it	is	just	a	natural	phenomenon.
If	 you	 become	 aware	 and	 become	 a	 witness	 to	 the	 second	 body	 –	 to	 the
liking	and	disliking	–	then	you	can	know	the	third	body.	The	third	is	the	astral
body.	 Just	 like	 the	 “influences”	 of	 the	 etheric	 body,	 the	 astral	 body	 has
“magnetic	forces.”	Its	magnetism	is	its	breath.	One	moment	you	are	powerful
and	the	next	moment	you	are	powerless;	one	moment	you	are	hopeful	and	the
next	moment	 you	 are	 hopeless;	 one	moment	 you	 are	 confident	 and	 the	 next
moment	you	 lose	all	your	confidence.	 It	 is	a	coming	 in	of	magnetism	 to	you
and	a	going	out	of	magnetism	from	you.	There	are	moments	when	you	can	defy
even	God,	and	there	are	moments	when	you	fear	even	a	shadow.
When	 the	magnetic	 force	 is	 in	 you,	 when	 it	 is	 coming	 into	 you,	 you	 are
great;	when	it	has	gone	from	you,	you	are	just	a	nobody.	And	this	is	changing
back	and	forth,	just	like	day	and	night;	the	circle	revolves,	the	wheel	revolves.
So	 even	 a	 person	 like	Napoleon	 had	 his	 impotent	moments	 and	 even	 a	 very
cowardly	person	has	his	moments	of	bravery.
In	judo	there	is	a	technique	to	know	when	a	person	is	powerless.	That	is	the
moment	to	attack	him.	When	he	is	powerful	you	are	bound	to	be	defeated,	so
you	 have	 to	 know	 the	 moment	 when	 his	 magnetic	 power	 is	 going	 out	 and
attack	him	then,	and	you	should	incite	him	to	attack	you	when	your	magnetic
force	is	coming	in.
This	 coming	 in	 and	 going	 out	 of	 the	magnetic	 force	 corresponds	 to	 your
breathing.	That	is	why,	when	you	have	to	do	something	difficult,	you	will	hold
your	breath	in.	For	example,	if	you	are	to	lift	a	heavy	stone,	you	cannot	pick	it
up	 when	 the	 breath	 is	 going	 out.	 You	 cannot	 do	 it!	 But	 when	 the	 breath	 is
coming	in,	or	when	the	breath	is	held	in,	you	can	do	it.	Your	breath	corresponds
to	what	is	happening	in	the	third	body.	So	when	the	breath	is	going	out	–	unless
the	person	has	been	trained	to	fool	you	–	that	is	the	moment	when	his	magnetic
force	is	going	out;	that	is	the	moment	to	attack.	And	this	is	the	secret	of	judo.
Even	 a	 stronger	 person	 than	 you	 can	 be	 defeated	 if	 you	 know	 the	 secret	 of
when	he	is	fearful	and	powerless.	When	the	magnetic	force	is	out	of	him,	he	is
bound	to	be	powerless.
The	third	body	lives	in	a	magnetic	sphere,	just	like	air.	There	are	magnetic
forces	all	around:	you	are	breathing	them	in	and	breathing	them	out.	But	if	you
become	aware	of	 this	magnetic	 force	 that	 is	 coming	and	going,	 then	you	are
neither	powerful	nor	powerless.	You	transcend	both.
Then	 there	 is	 the	 fourth	 body,	 the	 mental	 body:	 thought	 pulling	 in	 and
thought	pulling	out.	But	this	“thought	coming	in”	and	“thought	going	out”	has
parallels,	too.	When	thought	comes	to	you	while	you	breathe	in,	only	in	those
moments	is	original	thinking	born.	When	you	breathe	out,	those	are	moments
of	impotency;	no	original	thought	can	be	born	in	those	moments.	In	moments
when	 some	 original	 thought	 is	 there,	 the	 breathing	will	 even	 stop.	When	 an
original	 thought	 is	 born,	 then	 the	 breath	 stops.	 It	 is	 only	 a	 corresponding
phenomenon.
In	 the	 outgoing	 thought,	 nothing	 is	 born.	 It	 is	 simply	 dead.	 But	 if	 you
become	 aware	 of	 thoughts	 coming	 in	 and	 thoughts	 going	 out,	 then	 you	 can
know	the	fifth	body.
Up	to	the	fourth	body,	things	are	not	difficult	to	understand	because	we	have
some	experience	which	can	become	the	basis	to	understand	them.	Beyond	the
fourth,	 things	 become	 very	 strange	 –	 but	 still,	 something	 can	 be	 understood.
And	when	you	transcend	the	fourth	body	you	will	understand	it	more.
In	the	fifth	body	–	how	to	say	it?	The	atmosphere	for	the	fifth	body	is	life	–
just	 as	 thought,	 as	 breath,	 as	 magnetic	 force,	 as	 love	 and	 hatred,	 are
atmospheres	for	the	lower	bodies.
For	the	fifth	body,	life	itself	is	the	atmosphere.	So	in	the	fifth,	the	coming	in
is	a	moment	of	life,	and	the	going	out	is	a	moment	of	death.	With	the	fifth,	you
become	aware	that	 life	 is	not	something	that	 is	 in	you.	It	comes	into	you	and
goes	out	from	you.	Life	itself	is	not	in	you;	it	simply	comes	in	and	goes	out	just
like	breath.
That	 is	why	breath	 and	prana	 became	 synonymous	 –	 because	 of	 the	 fifth
body.	In	the	fifth	body,	the	word	prana	is	meaningful.	It	is	life	that	is	coming
and	life	that	is	going.	And	that	is	why	the	fear	of	death	is	constantly	following
us.	You	are	always	aware	that	death	is	nearby,	waiting	at	the	corner.	It	is	always
there,	waiting.	This	 feeling	of	 death	 always	waiting	 for	 you	–	 this	 feeling	of
insecurity,	of	death,	of	darkness	–	is	concerned	with	the	fifth	body.	It	is	a	very
dark	feeling,	very	vague,	because	you	are	not	completely	aware	of	it.
When	you	come	 to	 the	 fifth	body	and	become	aware	of	 it,	 then	you	know
that	life	and	death	both	are	just	breaths	to	the	fifth	body	–	coming	in	and	going
out.	 And	 when	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 this,	 you	 know	 that	 you	 cannot	 die
because	death	 is	not	an	 inherent	phenomenon;	nor	 is	 life.	Both	 life	and	death
are	 outward	 phenomena	 happening	 to	 you.	 You	 never	 have	 been	 alive,	 you
never	have	been	dead;	you	are	something	that	completely	transcends	both.	But
this	feeling	of	transcendence	can	only	come	when	you	become	aware	of	the	life
force	and	the	death	force	in	the	fifth	body.
Freud	said	somewhere	that	he	somehow	had	a	glimpse	of	this.	He	was	not
an	adept	in	yoga,	otherwise	he	would	have	understood	it.	He	called	it	“the	will
to	die,”	and	he	said	every	man	sometimes	is	longing	for	life	and	sometimes	is
longing	for	death.	There	are	two	opposing	wills	in	men:	a	will	to	live	and	a	will
to	 die.	 To	 the	 Western	 mind	 it	 was	 absolutely	 absurd:	 how	 could	 these
contradictory	wills	exist	in	one	person?	But	Freud	said	that	because	suicide	is
possible,	there	must	be	a	will	to	die.
No	animal	can	commit	suicide,	because	no	animal	can	become	aware	of	the
fifth	body.	Animals	cannot	commit	suicide	because	they	cannot	become	aware,
they	 cannot	 know,	 that	 they	 are	 alive.	 To	 commit	 suicide,	 one	 thing	 is
necessary:	to	be	aware	of	life	–	and	they	are	not	aware	of	life.	But	another	thing
is	also	necessary:	to	commit	suicide	you	must	also	be	unaware	of	death.
Animals	cannot	commit	 suicide	because	animals	are	not	aware	of	 life,	but
we	can	commit	suicide	because	we	are	aware	of	life	but	not	aware	of	death.	If
one	becomes	aware	of	death,	then	one	cannot	commit	suicide.	A	buddha	cannot
commit	 suicide	 because	 it	 is	 unnecessary;	 it	 is	 nonsense.	He	knows	 that	 you
cannot	 really	 kill	 yourself,	 you	 can	 only	 pretend	 to.	 Suicide	 is	 just	 a	 pose
because	really	you	are	neither	alive	nor	dead.
Death	is	on	the	fifth	plane,	in	the	fifth	body.	It	is	a	going	out	of	a	particular
energy	and	a	coming	 in	of	a	particular	energy.	You	are	 the	one	 in	which	 this
coming	 and	 going	 happens.	 If	 you	 become	 identified	with	 the	 first,	 you	 can
commit	 the	second.	 If	you	become	 identified	with	 living,	and	 if	 life	becomes
impossible,	 you	 can	 say,	 “I	will	 commit	 suicide.”	This	 is	 the	 other	 aspect	 of
your	fifth	body	asserting	itself.	There	is	not	a	single	human	being	who	has	not
thought	at	some	time	to	commit	suicide	–	because	death	is	the	other	side	of	life.
This	other	side	can	become	either	suicide	or	murder:	it	can	become	either.
If	you	are	obsessed	with	 life,	 if	you	are	 so	attached	 to	 it	 that	you	want	 to
deny	death	completely,	you	can	kill	another.	By	killing	another	you	satisfy	your
death	wish:	the	will	to	die.	By	this	trick	you	satisfy	it,	and	you	think	that	now
you	will	not	have	to	die	because	someone	else	has	died.
All	those	who	have	committed	great	murders	–	Hitler,	Mussolini	–	are	still
very	much	afraid	of	death.	They	are	always	in	fear	of	death,	so	they	project	this
death	on	others.	The	person	who	can	kill	 someone	 else	 feels	 that	 he	 is	more
powerful	 than	 death:	 he	 can	 kill	 others.	 In	 a	 magical	 way,	 with	 a	 magical
formula,	he	thinks	that	because	he	can	kill	he	transcends	death,	that	a	thing	he
can	do	to	others	cannot	be	done	to	him.	This	is	a	projection	of	death,	but	it	can
come	 back	 to	 you.	 If	 you	 kill	 so	 many	 people	 that	 in	 the	 end	 you	 commit
suicide,	it	is	the	projection	coming	back	to	you.
In	the	fifth	body,	with	life	and	death	coming	to	you	–	with	life	coming	and
going	 –	 one	 cannot	 be	 attached	 to	 anyone.	 If	 you	 are	 attached,	 you	 are	 not
accepting	the	polarity	in	its	totality,	and	you	will	become	ill.
Up	to	the	fourth	body	it	was	not	so	difficult,	but	to	conceive	of	death	and	to
accept	it	as	another	aspect	of	life	is	 the	most	difficult	act.	To	conceive	of	life
and	death	as	parallel	–	as	 just	 the	 same,	 as	 two	aspects	of	one	 thing	–	 is	 the
most	difficult	act.	But	in	the	fifth,	this	is	the	polarity.	This	is	pranic	existence	in
the	fifth.
With	the	sixth	body,	things	become	even	more	difficult	because	the	sixth	is
no	longer	life.	For	the	sixth	body	–	what	to	say?	After	the	fifth,	the	“I”	drops,
the	ego	drops.	Then	there	is	no	ego;	you	become	one	with	the	all.	Now	it	is	not
your	“anything”	that	comes	in	and	goes	out	because	the	ego	is	not.	Everything
becomes	cosmic	and	because	it	becomes	cosmic,	the	polarity	takes	the	form	of
creation	 and	 destruction	 –	 srishti	 and	pralaya.	 That	 is	why	 it	 becomes	more
difficult	with	the	sixth:	the	atmosphere	is	“the	creative	force	and	the	destructive
force.”	In	Hindu	mythology	they	call	these	forces	Brahma	and	Shiva.
Brahma	 is	 the	 deity	 of	 creation,	 Vishnu	 is	 the	 deity	 of	 maintenance,	 and
Shiva	 is	 the	 deity	 of	 the	 great	 death	 –	 of	 destruction	 or	 dissolution,	 where
everything	goes	back	to	its	original	source.	The	sixth	body	is	in	that	vast	sphere
of	creativity	and	destructivity:	the	force	of	Brahma	and	the	force	of	Shiva.
Every	 moment	 the	 creation	 comes	 to	 you,	 and	 every	 moment	 everything
goes	 into	 dissolution.	 So	when	 a	 yogi	 says,	 “I	 have	 seen	 the	 creation,	 and	 I
have	seen	the	pralaya,	the	end;	I	have	seen	the	coming	of	the	world	into	being
and	I	have	seen	the	returning	of	the	world	into	nonbeing,”	he	is	talking	about
the	sixth	body.	The	ego	is	not	there:	everything	that	is	coming	in	and	going	out
is	you.	You	become	one	with	it.
A	star	is	being	born:	it	is	your	birth	that	is	coming.	And	the	star	is	going	out:
that	is	your	going	out.	So	they	say	in	Hindu	mythology	that	one	creation	is	one
breath	of	Brahma	–	only	one	breath!	It	is	the	cosmic	force	breathing.	When	he,
Brahma,	 breathes	 in,	 the	 creation	 comes	 into	 existence:	 a	 star	 is	 born,	 stars
come	 out	 of	 chaos	 –	 everything	 comes	 into	 existence.	 And	when	 his	 breath
goes	out,	everything	goes	out,	everything	ceases:	a	star	dies	–	existence	moves
into	nonexistence.
That	is	why	I	am	saying	that	in	the	sixth	body	it	is	very	difficult.	The	sixth	is
not	 egocentric;	 it	 becomes	 cosmic.	 And	 in	 the	 sixth	 body,	 everything	 about
creation	is	known	–	everything	that	all	of	the	religions	of	the	world	talk	about.
When	 one	 talks	 about	 creation,	 he	 is	 talking	 about	 the	 sixth	 body	 and	 the
knowledge	concerned	with	it.	And	when	one	is	 talking	of	the	great	flood,	 the
end,	one	is	talking	about	the	sixth	body.
With	the	great	flood	of	Judeo-Christian	or	Babylonian	mythology,	or	Syrian
mythology,	or	with	the	pralaya	of	the	Hindus,	there	is	one	out	breath	–	that	of
the	 sixth	 body.	This	 is	 a	 cosmic	 experience,	 not	 an	 individual	 one.	This	 is	 a
cosmic	experience;	you	are	not	there!
The	person	who	is	in	the	sixth	body	–	who	has	reached	the	sixth	body	–	will
see	everything	 that	 is	dying	as	his	own	death.	A	Mahavira	cannot	kill	an	ant,
not	 because	 of	 any	 principle	 of	 nonviolence,	 but	 because	 it	 is	 his	 death.
Everything	that	dies	is	his	death.
When	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 this,	 of	 the	 creation	 and	 the	 destruction	 –	 of
things	coming	into	existence	every	moment	and	things	going	out	of	existence
every	moment	–	the	awareness	is	of	the	sixth	body.	Whenever	a	thing	is	going
out	of	existence,	something	else	is	coming	in:	a	sun	is	dying,	another	is	being
born	somewhere	else;	this	earth	will	die,	another	earth	will	come.
We	become	attached	even	in	the	sixth	body.	“Humanity	must	not	die!”	–	but
everything	 that	 is	 born	must	 die,	 even	 humanity	must	 die.	 Hydrogen	 bombs
will	be	created	to	destroy	it.	And	the	moment	we	create	hydrogen	bombs,	the
very	 next	 moment	 we	 create	 a	 longing	 to	 go	 to	 another	 planet,	 because	 the
bomb	means	 that	 the	 earth	 is	 near	 its	 death.	 Before	 this	 earth	 dies,	 life	 will
begin	to	evolve	somewhere	else.
The	sixth	body	is	the	feeling	of	cosmic	creation	and	destruction	–	creation–
destruction;	the	breath	coming	in,	the	breath	going	out.	That	is	why	“Brahma’s
breath”	is	used.	Brahma	is	a	sixth-body	personality;	you	become	Brahma	in	the
sixth	 body.	 Really,	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 both	 Brahma	 and	 Shiva,	 the	 two
polarities.	 And	 Vishnu	 is	 beyond	 the	 polarity.	 They	 form	 the	 trimurti,	 the
trinity:	Brahma,	Vishnu,	and	Mahesh	–	or	Shiva.
This	trinity	is	the	trinity	of	witnessing.	If	you	become	aware	of	Brahma	and
Shiva,	the	creator	and	the	destroyer	–	if	you	become	aware	of	those	two,	then
you	know	the	third,	which	is	Vishnu.	Vishnu	is	your	reality	in	the	sixth	body.
That	 is	 why	 Vishnu	 became	 the	 most	 prominent	 of	 the	 three.	 Brahma	 is
remembered,	 but	 although	 he	 is	 the	 god	 of	 creation,	 he	 is	 worshipped	 in
perhaps	only	one	or	two	temples.	He	must	be	worshipped,	but	he	is	not	really
worshipped.
Shiva	 is	 worshipped	 even	 more	 than	 Vishnu	 because	 we	 fear	 death.	 The
worship	 of	 him	 comes	 out	 of	 our	 fear	 of	 death.	But	 hardly	 anyone	worships
Brahma,	the	god	of	creation,	because	there	is	nothing	to	be	fearful	of;	you	are
already	 created,	 so	 you	 are	 not	 concerned	 with	 Brahma.	 That	 is	 why	 not	 a
single	 great	 temple	 is	 dedicated	 to	 him.	 He	 is	 the	 creator,	 so	 every	 temple
should	be	dedicated	to	him,	but	it	is	not.
Shiva	has	the	greatest	number	of	worshippers.	He	is	everywhere	because	so
many	 temples	 were	 made	 as	 a	 dedication	 to	 him.	 Just	 a	 stone	 is	 enough	 to
symbolize	 him;	 otherwise	 it	 would	 have	 been	 impossible	 to	 create	 so	 many
idols	of	him.	So	just	a	stone	is	enough.	Just	put	a	stone	somewhere	and	Shiva	is
there.	Because	the	mind	is	so	fearful	of	death,	you	cannot	escape	from	Shiva;
he	must	be	worshipped	–	and	he	has	been	worshipped.
But	 Vishnu	 is	 the	 more	 substantial	 divinity.	 That	 is	 why	 Rama	 is	 an
incarnation	 of	 Vishnu,	 Krishna	 is	 an	 incarnation	 of	 Vishnu,	 every	 avatar	 –
divine	incarnation	–	is	an	incarnation	of	Vishnu.	And	even	Brahma	and	Shiva
worship	Vishnu.	Brahma	may	be	the	creator,	but	he	creates	for	Vishnu;	Shiva
may	be	the	destroyer,	but	he	destroys	for	Vishnu.	These	are	the	two	breaths	of
Vishnu,	 the	 incoming	 and	 the	 outgoing:	 Brahma	 is	 the	 incoming	 breath	 and
Shiva	is	the	outgoing	one.	And	Vishnu	is	the	reality	in	the	sixth	body.
In	the	seventh	body,	 things	become	even	more	difficult.	Buddha	called	the
seventh	body	the	nirvana	kaya,	 the	body	of	enlightenment,	because	 the	 truth,
the	absolute,	is	in	the	seventh	body.	The	seventh	body	is	the	last	body,	so	there
is	 not	 even	 creation	 and	 destruction	 but,	 rather,	 being	 and	 nonbeing.	 In	 the
seventh,	creation	is	always	of	something	else,	it	is	not	of	you.	Creation	will	be
of	something	else	and	destruction	will	be	of	something	else,	not	of	you,	while
being	is	of	you,	and	nonbeing	is	of	you.
In	the	seventh	body,	being	and	nonbeing	–	existence	and	nonexistence	–	are
the	 two	 breaths.	 One	 should	 not	 be	 identified	 with	 either.	 All	 religions	 are
started	by	those	who	have	reached	the	seventh	body;	and	at	 the	end	language
can	 be	 stretched,	 at	 the	 most,	 to	 two	 words:	 being	 and	 nonbeing.	 Buddha
speaks	 the	 language	 of	 nonbeing,	 of	 the	 outgoing	 breath,	 so	 he	 says,
“Nothingness	is	the	reality”;	while	Shankara	speaks	the	language	of	being	and
says	that	brahman	is	the	ultimate	reality.	Shankara	uses	positive	terms	because
he	chooses	 the	 incoming	breath,	 and	Buddha	uses	negative	 terms	because	he
chooses	the	outgoing	breath.	But	these	are	the	only	choices	as	far	as	language
is	concerned.
The	third	choice	is	the	reality,	which	cannot	be	said.	At	the	most	we	can	say
“absolute	being”	or	“absolute	nonbeing.”	This	much	can	be	said,	because	 the
seventh	body	is	beyond	this.	Transcendence	is	still	possible.
I	can	say	something	about	this	room	if	I	go	out.	If	I	transcend	this	room	and
reach	another	room,	I	can	recollect	this	one,	I	can	say	something	about	it.	But	if
I	go	out	of	this	room	and	fall	 into	an	abyss,	then	I	cannot	say	anything	about
even	 this	 room.	 So	 far,	 with	 each	 body,	 a	 third	 point	 could	 be	 caught	 into
words,	symbolized,	because	the	body	beyond	it	was	there.	You	could	go	there
and	 look	 backward.	 But	 only	 up	 to	 the	 seventh	 is	 this	 possible.	 Beyond	 the
seventh	body	nothing	can	be	said,	because	the	seventh	is	the	last	body;	beyond
it	is	“bodilessness.”
With	the	seventh,	one	has	to	choose	being	or	nonbeing	–	either	the	language
of	negation	or	the	language	of	positivity.	And	there	are	only	two	choices.	One
is	Buddha’s	 choice:	 he	 says,	 “Nothing	 remains,”	 and	 the	 other	 is	 Shankara’s
choice:	he	says,	“Everything	remains.”
In	the	seven	dimensions	–	in	the	seven	bodies	–	as	far	as	man	is	concerned
and	 as	 far	 as	 the	 world	 is	 concerned,	 life	 energy	 manifests	 into
multidimensional	 realms.	 Everywhere,	 wherever	 life	 is	 to	 be	 found,	 the
incoming	and	the	outgoing	process	will	be	there.	Wherever	life	is,	the	process
will	be.	Life	cannot	exist	without	this	polarity.
So	prana	 is	energy,	cosmic	energy,	and	our	 first	acquaintance	with	 it	 is	 in
the	physical	body.	It	manifests	first	as	breath,	and	then	it	goes	on	manifesting
as	breath	in	other	forms:	influences,	magnetism,	thoughts,	life,	creation,	being.
It	goes	on,	and	if	one	becomes	aware	of	it,	one	always	transcends	it	to	reach	to
a	third	point.	The	moment	you	reach	this	third	point,	you	transcend	that	body
and	enter	the	next	body.	You	enter	the	second	body	from	the	first,	and	so	on.
If	you	go	on	transcending,	up	to	the	seventh	there	is	still	a	body,	but	beyond
the	 seventh	 there	 is	 bodilessness.	 Then	 you	 become	 pure.	 Then	 you	 are	 not
divided;	then	there	are	no	more	polarities.	Then	it	is	advait,	not	two:	then	it	is
oneness.
	
Chapter	5:	Sleep	and	Wakefulness	in	the	Chakras
	
Each	chakra	has	a	sleep	part,	except	the	last	–	the	sahasrar.	At	the	seventh
chakra,	awareness	is	total:	it	is	pure	awareness.	That’s	why	Krishna	says	in	the
Gita:	“The	yogi	never	sleeps.”	“The	yogi”	means	one	who	has	come	to	the	last
center	of	his	being,	to	the	ultimate	flowering;	one	who	has	become	a	lotus.	He
never	sleeps.	His	body	sleeps,	his	mind	sleeps:	he	never	sleeps.	Even	when	a
buddha	 is	 sleeping,	 deep	 in	 the	 innermost	 core	 of	 his	 being	 a	 light	 goes	 on
burning	bright.
The	 seventh	 chakra	 has	 no	 sleep	 part	 to	 it,	 all	 the	 other	 six	 chakras	 have
both:	 yin,	 yang.	 Sometimes	 they	 sleep	 and	 sometimes	 they	 are	 awake:	 day,
night	–	they	have	both	aspects.	When	you	feel	hungry,	the	center	for	hunger	is
awake.	If	you	have	ever	tried	fasting,	you	would	have	been	surprised.	If	you	try
fasting,	then	for	two,	three	days	in	the	beginning	you	will	feel	hunger,	and	then
sometimes	 hunger	 will	 disappear	 completely.	 It	 will	 come	 again,	 it	 will
disappear	again,	it	will	come	again…	You	are	not	eating	at	all,	so	you	cannot
say,	“The	hunger	disappears	because	I	have	eaten.”	You	are	fasting:	sometimes
hunger	 comes	with	 great	 power,	 tries	 to	 overpower	 you	 –	 and	 if	 you	 remain
undisturbed	by	it,	the	hunger	goes.	The	chakra	has	fallen	asleep	–	it	will	awake
again	in	its	turn	when	the	day	will	come;	and	it	will	fall	back	into	sleep	again.
The	same	happens	with	the	sex	center.	You	feel	so	hungry	for	love,	then	you
have	made	love	–	and	then	suddenly	all	desire	for	love	disappears.	The	chakra
has	 fallen	 asleep.	 If	 you	 try	 celibacy,	 without	 repression,	 then	 you	 will	 be
surprised.	If	you	don’t	repress	your	sexual	desire,	you	simply	watch	it…	Try	it
for	three	months	–	just	be	watchful.	When	the	desire	comes,	sit	silently,	let	it	be
there,	let	it	knock	on	your	doors,	listen	to	it,	be	attentive	–	but	don’t	be	carried
away	by	it.	Let	it	be	there:	don’t	repress	it,	and	don’t	indulge	in	it.	Be	a	witness
–	 and	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 again.	 Sometimes	 the	 desire	 comes	 with	 such
intensity	 that	one	feels	one	may	go	crazy.	And	 then	automatically	on	 its	own
accord	 it	 disappears,	 and	 sex	 becomes	 irrelevant.	 Again	 it	 comes,	 again	 it
disappears.	The	chakra	goes	on	moving:	 sometimes	 it	 is	day,	 then	sex	arises;
sometimes	it	is	night,	then	the	sex	goes	to	sleep.
And	so	is	true	about	all	six	chakras	below	the	seventh.	Sleep	does	not	have	a
separate	chakra;	sleep	has	a	counterpart	with	each	chakra,	except	sahasrar.	So
one	 more	 thing	 to	 be	 understood:	 as	 you	 grow	 higher	 and	 higher	 in	 your
chakras,	you	will	have	a	better	quality	of	sleep	because	a	higher	chakra	has	a
deeper	 quality	 of	 relaxation.	The	man	who	 lives	with	 the	 first	 –	muladhar	 –
will	not	have	a	deep	sleep.	His	sleep	will	be	very	superficial	because	he	lives
with	the	physical,	the	material.
I	can	describe	these	chakras	in	this	way	too.	First,	the	material	–	muladhar.
Second,	the	vital	–	svadhishthan.	Third,	 the	sexual,	 the	electrical	–	manipura.
Fourth,	the	moral,	aesthetic	–	anahata.	Fifth,	the	religious	–	vishuddha.	Sixth,
the	spiritual	–	agya.	And	seventh,	the	divine	–	sahasrar.
As	you	move	higher,	your	sleep	will	go	deeper	and	will	have	a	new	quality
to	it.	The	man	who	is	food-obsessed	and	lives	only	to	eat	and	eat	and	eat,	his
sleep	will	 be	 very	 disturbed.	His	 sleep	will	 not	 have	 silence,	 peace	 to	 it;	 his
sleep	will	not	have	music	in	it.	His	sleep	will	be	nightmarish.	The	man	who	is	a
little	 higher	 than	 the	 food	 addict,	 who	 is	 more	 interested	 in	 people	 than	 in
things	and	wants	to	absorb	people,	will	have	a	deeper	sleep	–	but	not	very	deep.
The	sexual	person	will	have	the	deepest,	in	the	lower	realm.	That’s	why	sex	is
used	 almost	 as	 a	 tranquilizer.	 If	 you	 cannot	 fall	 asleep,	 make	 love	 –	 and
immediately	you	will	 be	 falling	 asleep.	Love	 relieves	you	of	 tensions.	 In	 the
West,	 doctors	go	on	prescribing	 sex	 for	 those	who	 suffer	 from	 sleeplessness.
Now	they	even	prescribe	sex	for	people	who	are	prone	to	heart	attacks	because
sex	relaxes,	gives	you	deep	sleep.
On	the	lowest	plane,	sex	gives	you	the	deepest	sleep.	Then	if	you	move	still
higher,	 with	 the	 fourth	 –	 anahata	 –	 sleep	 becomes	 tremendously	 tranquil,
silent,	very	purifying	and	refined.	When	you	love	somebody,	your	relaxation	is
tremendous,	 immense.	 Just	 the	 idea	 that	 somebody	 loves	 you	 and	 you	 love
somebody,	relaxes	you;	all	tensions	are	gone.	The	world	is	no	longer	alien,	it	is
a	home.	With	 love,	 the	house	is	 transformed	into	a	home	and	the	alien	world
becomes	a	community,	and	nothing	is	far	away.	Through	the	person	you	love,
God	has	 come	very	much	closer.	A	 loving	person	knows	a	deep	 sleep.	Hate,
and	you	will	miss	your	sleep.	Be	angry,	and	you	will	miss	your	sleep	–	you	will
fall	lower.	Love,	have	compassion,	and	you	will	have	a	deep	sleep.
With	 the	 fifth,	 sleep	becomes	 almost	 prayerful.	Hence,	 all	 the	 religions	of
the	world	 have	 been	 insisting	 to	 pray	 before	 you	 go	 to	 sleep.	 Let	 prayer	 be
associated	with	 sleep.	Never	 fall	 into	 sleep	without	 prayer,	 so	 the	 rhythm	of
prayer	 goes	 on	 vibrating	 in	 your	 sleep.	The	 reverberations	 of	 the	 prayer	will
transform	your	sleep.	The	fifth	is	the	center	of	prayer	–	and	if	you	can	pray,	and
if	you	can	fall	asleep	praying,	you	will	be	surprised	 in	 the	morning:	you	will
awake,	 and	you	will	 awake	praying.	Your	very	wakefulness	will	be	a	 sort	of
prayer.	With	the	fifth,	sleep	becomes	prayer.	It	is	no	longer	ordinary	sleep.	You
are	not	only	going	into	sleep,	you	are	going	in	a	subtle	way	into	God.
Sleep	is	a	door	when	you	forget	your	ego;	and	it	is	easier	to	drop	into	God
than	while	you	are	awake,	because	when	you	are	awake	the	ego	is	very	strong.
When	 you	 fall	 deep	 into	 sleep	 your	 healing	 powers	 function	 to	 their	 total
optimum	capacity.	Hence	 the	physicians	say	 that	 if	a	person	 is	 ill	and	cannot
sleep,	there	is	no	possibility	for	his	being	healed	–	because	healing	comes	from
within.	Healing	comes	when	the	ego	is	absolutely	nonexistential:	when	the	ego
is	 not,	 then	 the	 healing	power	 flows	 from	 the	within	 –	 it	wells	 up.	The	man
who	has	moved	to	the	fifth,	 the	vishuddha	chakra	–	 to	 the	chakra	of	prayer	–
his	life	becomes	a	benediction.	You	can	see:	even	if	he	walks	you	will	feel	the
quality	of	relaxation	in	his	gestures,	in	his	movements.
The	sixth	chakra	–	agya	–	is	the	last,	where	sleep	becomes	perfect,	beyond
which	 sleep	 is	 not	 needed:	 the	 work	 is	 finished.	 Up	 to	 the	 sixth,	 sleep	 is
needed.	 With	 the	 sixth,	 sleep	 becomes	 meditative	 –	 not	 even	 prayerful	 but
meditative	–	because	 in	prayer	 there	 is	a	duality:	 I	and	 thou,	 the	devotee	and
the	deity.	With	 the	sixth,	even	 that	duality	disappears.	Sleep	 is	profound	–	as
profound	 as	 death.	 In	 fact,	 death	 is	 nothing	 but	 a	 great	 sleep,	 and	 sleep	 is
nothing	but	a	small	death.	With	the	sixth,	sleep	penetrates	to	your	deepest	core
and	then	the	work	is	finished.	When	you	come	out	of	the	sixth	to	the	seventh,
sleep	is	no	longer	needed.	You	have	gone	beyond	duality.	Then	you	are	never
tired,	so	sleep	is	not	needed.
This	state	of	the	seventh	is	the	state	of	pure	absolute	awareness	–	call	it	the
state	of	Christ,	Buddha,	God.
	
Somebody	has	asked	a	question	related	to	this:
If	sex	changes	into	love,	does	the	urge	to	dominate	become	will,	or	the	effort	to	be
conscious?
This	 too	 has	 to	 be	 understood.	 The	 first	 three	 lower	 centers	 are	 deeply
related	 with	 the	 second	 part	 –	 the	 three	 higher	 centers.	 First,	 muladhar,
svadhishthan,	 manipura:	 these	 are	 the	 first	 three.	 The	 second	 three	 are:
anahata,	vishuddha,	agya.	 These	 are	 the	 two	 pairs.	 They	 are	 joined	 together
deeply,	and	it	has	to	be	understood	–	it	will	be	helpful	for	you,	for	your	journey.
The	first	chakra	is	concerned	with	food	and	the	fourth	chakra	is	concerned
with	love.	Love	and	food	are	deeply	related,	joined	together.	Hence	it	happens
that	whenever	somebody	loves	you,	you	don’t	eat	much.	If	a	woman	is	loved
she	remains	lean,	thin	and	beautiful.	If	she	is	not	loved	she	starts	becoming	fat,
ugly,	goes	on	accumulating;	she	starts	eating	too	much.	Or,	vice	versa	too:	if	a
woman	does	not	want	to	be	loved,	she	starts	eating	too	much.	That	becomes	a
protection	–	then	nobody	will	be	attracted	toward	her.
Have	you	seen?	 If	a	beloved	comes	 to	your	home,	a	 friend	has	come,	and
you	are	so	happy,	so	full	of	love	–	that	day,	appetite	disappears.	You	don’t	feel
like	eating	–	as	if	something	more	subtle	than	food	has	fulfilled	you,	something
more	subtle	than	food	is	inside	you	and	the	emptiness	is	not	there.	You	are	full,
you	feel	full.	Miserable	people	eat	too	much,	happy	people	don’t	eat	too	much.
The	happier	a	person,	the	less	he	is	addicted	to	food	–	because	he	has	a	higher
food	 available:	 love.	 Love	 is	 food	 on	 a	 higher	 plane.	 If	 food	 is	 food	 for	 the
body,	love	is	food	for	the	spirit.
Now	even	scientists	are	suspecting	it.	When	a	child	is	born,	the	mother	can
give	just	milk,	bodily	food.	She	may	not	give	love	–	then	the	child	will	suffer;
his	 body	 will	 grow	 but	 his	 spirit	 will	 suffer.	 Just	 bodily	 nourishment	 is	 not
enough:	spiritual	nourishment	 is	needed.	 If	a	mother	only	gives	 food	and	not
love	then	she	is	not	a	mother,	she	is	only	a	nurse.	And	the	child	will	suffer	for
his	whole	 life	–	 something	will	 remain	 stuck,	not	grown,	 retarded.	The	child
needs	food,	the	child	needs	love:	love	is	needed	even	more	than	food.
Have	you	seen?	If	a	child	is	given	love,	he	does	not	bother	about	food	much.
If	 the	 mother	 loves	 the	 child,	 she	 is	 always	 worried	 that	 the	 child	 is	 not
drinking	as	much	milk	as	he	should.	But	 if	 the	mother	 is	non-loving	then	the
child	 drinks	 too	much	milk.	 In	 fact	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 take	 him	 away	 from	 the
breast	 because	 the	 child	 becomes	 afraid:	 love	 is	 not	 there,	 he	 has	 to	 depend
only	on	physical	food	–	the	subtle	food	is	missing.
And	this	goes	on	happening	in	your	whole	life.	Whenever	you	feel	that	you
are	 missing	 love,	 you	 go	 on	 stuffing	 your	 body	 with	 food	 –	 it	 becomes	 a
substitute.	Whenever	people	feel	empty	and	they	don’t	have	that	thrill	that	love
brings,	 that	 zest	 that	 love	 brings,	 that	 energy	 that	 love	 releases,	 they	 start
stuffing	the	body	with	food.	They	have	fallen	back	to	their	childhood;	they	are
in	a	regressed	state.
Children	who	are	given	enough	love	are	never	addicted	much	to	food.	Their
spirit	is	so	full:	the	higher	is	available	–	who	bothers	about	the	lower?
Remember,	all	 the	 religions	have	 talked	about	 fasting	 for	a	certain	 reason.
Unless	 you	 are	 taken	 out	 of	 your	 food	 obsession,	 prayer	 will	 not	 happen.
Hence,	fasting	gives	a	great	possibility	to	pray.	I	am	not	telling	you	to	become
addicted	to	fasting.	I	am	not	 telling	you	to	start	 torturing	yourself.	But	 if	you
are	 a	 food	 addict	 then	 fasting	 is	 the	 medicine.	 If	 you	 have	 been	 eating	 too
much,	 bring	 a	 balance.	 Eating	 too	 much,	 you	 remain	 too	 attached	 to	 the
physical	and	you	cannot	fly	into	the	sky.	You	are	too	burdened:	a	little	fasting
will	be	helpful.	And	in	fasting,	people	have	observed	that	prayer	becomes	very
easy,	simple;	it	is	no	longer	a	problem.	Because	when	you	are	not	burdened	too
much	 by	 food	 and	 the	 body,	 the	 spirit	 is	 weightless,	 can	 fly:	 the	 spirit	 has
wings.
The	first	and	the	fourth	are	related.	And	my	experience	is	this:	if	people	are
helped	to	be	more	loving,	by	and	by	they	forget	about	food.	The	old	religions
insist	 for	 fasting,	 I	 insist	 for	 love	–	and	you	can	 see	 the	connection.	The	old
religions	insist	for	fasting,	so	that	you	can	be	taken	away	from	your	too-much-
food	obsession.	I	insist	for	love	–	my	technique	is	more	subtle.	Then,	without
even	becoming	aware,	if	you	are	loving	you	will	be	taken	away	from	your	food
obsession.	 The	 old	 religions	 sometimes	 can	 be	 dangerous,	 because	 the	 food
addict	 can	 turn	 into	 a	 fast	 addict.	 He	 can	 become	 another	 sort	 of	 neurotic
person:	 first	 he	was	 eating	 too	much,	 now	 he	may	 start	 starving	 himself.	 In
both	the	cases	he	remains	concerned	with	food.
I	 have	 watched	 many	 Jaina	 monks:	 they	 continuously	 think	 about	 food.
They	believe	in	fasting,	they	fast,	but	they	are	continuously	thinking	about	food
–	what	to	eat,	what	not	to	eat,	how	to	eat,	when	to	eat	–	their	whole	psychology
is	based	on	food.	Food	becomes	too	much	of	a	problem.	Hence,	I	don’t	insist
on	 fasting,	 I	 insist	 on	 love	 –	 and	 fasting	 comes	 as	 a	 shadow.	 If	 you	 are
tremendously	in	love,	one	day	you	will	find	you	don’t	want	to	eat.	The	love	is
so	much,	and	you	don’t	want	to	destroy	it.	You	are	flowing	so	high,	you	don’t
want	to	stuff	yourself	and	bring	yourself	low;	you	don’t	want	to	move	on	earth
today.	And	 the	 fasting	 comes	 naturally	 –	 you	 don’t	 think	 about	 it,	 you	 don’t
take	a	vow	about	it,	you	don’t	take	a	decision	about	it:	suddenly	you	feel	that
higher	food	is	available	and	the	lower	is	not	needed	–	and	the	fasting	happens.
Then	fasting	is	beautiful.
The	 second	 chakra	 is	 related	 to	 the	 fifth.	The	 second	 chakra	 is	 political	 –
domination,	domination	over	others	–	and	the	fifth	chakra	is	spiritual	power	–
domination	over	oneself.	With	the	second	chakra	you	try	to	overpower	people,
with	 the	 fifth	 you	 try	 to	 overpower	 yourself.	 With	 the	 second	 you	 try	 to
conquer	others,	with	the	fifth	you	try	to	conquer	yourself.	With	the	second	you
become	 a	 politician,	 with	 the	 fifth	 you	 become	 a	 priest.	 And	 priests	 and
politicians	 have	 always	 remained	 together:	 there	 is	 a	 conspiracy	 between	 the
priest	and	the	politician.	The	kings	and	the	priests,	the	politicians	and	the	popes
–	they	are	joined	together.	They	may	not	be	aware,	but	this	is	the	basic	cause
behind	 it:	 the	 politician	 needs	 the	 support	 of	 the	 priest,	 and	 the	 priest	 feels
somehow	in	tune	with	the	politician,	because	both	hanker	for	power	–	one	over
others,	the	other	over	oneself,	but	the	goal	is	power.
Remember,	I	would	not	like	you	to	become	a	politician	and	I	would	not	like
you	to	become	a	priest	either.	In	fact	 there	is	no	need	to	dominate	others	and
there	is	no	need	to	dominate	oneself.	Domination	as	such	should	be	dropped:
one	should	simply	be.	The	very	idea	of	dominating	is	egoistic	–	whether	you
dominate	others	or	yourself	makes	no	difference.	Have	you	not	observed	that	a
person	who	feels	that	he	has	great	self-control	becomes	a	great	egoist?	He	goes
on	 declaring	 that	 he	 has	 tremendous	 control	 over	 himself.	 His	 ego	 is
strengthened	–	there	is	danger.
Domination	 as	 such	 has	 to	 be	 dropped.	 You	 should	 not	 become	 a	 priest.
Become	religious	–	don’t	become	a	priest.	To	become	religious	is	one	thing,	to
become	 a	 priest	 is	 another.	 The	 priest	 by	 and	 by	 starts	 declaring	 that	 he	 not
only	 has	 power	 over	 himself,	 he	 has	 power	 over	God.	 The	 priest	 by	 and	 by
starts	declaring	that	he	has	power	over	spiritual	forces,	psychic	forces,	occult,
esoteric.	 He	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 obsessed	 with	 inner	 powers.	 But	 all
power	is	an	ego	trip.
Be	aware	of	the	second,	and	be	aware	of	the	fifth	too:	there	are	pitfalls,	there
are	dangerous	possibilities.	And	once	a	person	becomes	a	priest	he	stops;	his
growth	is	no	longer	going	on.	Once	you	have	become	a	priest	you	are	no	longer
religious;	 your	 whole	 energy	 has	 become	 stagnant.	 The	 religious	 person	 is
always	flowing:	from	first	to	second,	from	second	to	third,	from	third	to	fourth,
he	 is	 always	 flowing.	Up	 to	 the	 seventh,	he	knows	no	 stopping	–	 there	 is	no
station	on	 the	way.	And	with	 the	seventh,	he	also	does	not	stop	because	with
the	seventh,	he	disappears.	There	is	nobody	to	stop.
Up	to	the	sixth,	you	can	stop	and	become	stagnant.	With	each	center	there	is
a	 possibility	 that	 you	may	 fall	 and	become	 stagnant.	 If	 you	become	 stagnant
with	the	first,	you	will	know	only	the	material.	If	you	become	stagnant	with	the
second,	you	will	know	only	the	political.	If	you	become	stagnant	with	the	third,
you	will	know	only	the	sexual	–	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	The	second	and	fifth
are	 joined	 together,	and	so	are	 the	 third	and	sixth.	The	 third	 is	 the	sex	center
and	the	sixth	is	the	Tantra	center.
Now,	one	thing	to	always	be	remembered:	if	you	are	not	very	alert,	you	may
go	 on	 believing	 that	 you	 are	 moving	 into	 Tantra	 and	 you	 may	 be	 simply
rationalizing	 your	 sexuality	 –	 it	 may	 be	 nothing	 but	 sex,	 rationalized	 in	 the
terminology	of	Tantra.	 If	 you	move	 into	 sex	with	 awareness,	 it	 can	 turn	 into
Tantra.	 If	 you	 move	 into	 Tantra	 with	 unawareness,	 it	 can	 fall	 and	 become
ordinary	sex.	It	has	happened	in	India	–	because	only	India	has	tried	it.
All	the	Tantra	schools	in	India,	sooner	or	later,	were	reduced	to	sex	orgies.	It
is	very	difficult	to	keep	aware	–	it	is	almost	impossible	to	keep	aware.	If	from
the	very	beginning	the	discipline	has	not	gone	very	deep	in	you,	there	is	every
possibility	that	you	will	start	deceiving	yourself.	Tantra	schools	arose	in	India
with	great	energy,	with	great	insight.	And	they	had	something	–	because	that	is
the	 last	 center	 humanly	 available:	 the	 seventh	 is	 superhuman,	 the	 seventh	 is
divine.	The	sixth	is	the	spiritual	center.
From	sex	to	Tantra:	a	great	revolution,	a	mutation,	is	possible	in	man.	And
in	the	East,	people	became	aware	that	if	you	become	meditative	while	making
love,	 the	 quality	 of	 sex	 changes	 and	 something	 new	 enters	 it	 –	 it	 becomes
tantric,	it	becomes	prayerful,	it	becomes	meditative.	It	becomes	samadhi.	And
a	 natural	 flow	 happens:	 from	 the	 third	 you	 can	 jump	 to	 the	 sixth	 –	 you	 can
bypass	the	fourth	and	the	fifth.	It	is	a	great	temptation,	a	great	leap	–	you	can
bypass,	a	shortcut	–	but	dangerous	 too	because	you	may	be	simply	deceiving
yourself.	Man	is	very	clever	–	very	clever	in	finding	rationalizations.
I	have	heard…
	
From	the	diary	of	a	globe-trotting	young	cinema	queen:
Monday:	The	Captain	saw	me	on	deck	and	was	kind	enough	to	ask	me	to	sit
at	his	table	for	the	rest	of	the	trip.
Tuesday:	 I	 spent	 the	morning	on	 the	bridge	with	 the	Captain.	He	 took	my
picture	leaning	against	the	“Passengers	not	allowed	on	this	bridge”	sign.
Wednesday:	The	Captain	made	proposals	to	me,	unbecoming	an	officer	and
a	gentleman.
Thursday:	 The	 Captain	 threatened	 to	 sink	 the	 ship	 unless	 I	 agreed	 to	 his
proposals.
Friday:	I	saved	eight	hundred	lives	today.
	
You	can	find	rationalizations.	The	temptation	is	always	there	–	you	can	find
good	reasons	for	wrong	motives.
Tantra	 can	 any	 moment	 become	 just	 a	 garbed	 sexuality;	 just	 nothing	 but
sexuality,	 in	 the	 guise	 of	Tantra,.	 Then	 it	 is	 dangerous,	more	 dangerous	 than
ordinary	 sex	 –	 ordinary	 sex	 is	 at	 least	 honest.	 You	 don’t	 pretend,	 you	 don’t
claim	something	higher;	you	simply	say	 it	 is	ordinary	sex.	But	Tantra	can	be
dangerous:	 you	 start	 pretending	 that	 it	 is	 something	 higher,	 something
superhuman,	something	not	of	this	world.	Keep	this	in	mind.	The	third	and	the
sixth	are	very	deeply	related.	The	third	can	become	the	sixth,	the	sixth	can	fall
into	the	third.	A	great	awareness	is	needed.
These	first	three	and	the	last	three	are	two	balancing	forces.	The	seventh	is
beyond.	When	the	first	 three	have	been	balanced	by	 the	second	three	–	when
the	lower	has	been	balanced	by	the	higher,	when	the	lower	has	been	canceled
by	the	higher,	when	the	lower	and	the	higher	are	of	the	same	weight	–	then	the
seventh	happens.	Then	suddenly	the	duality	disappears.	Then	there	is	nothing
lower,	 nothing	higher;	 nothing	outer,	 nothing	 inner;	 nothing	worldly,	 nothing
otherworldly:	then	only	one	is.	That	one	is	the	goal	of	all	search.
	
Chapter	6:	The	Experience	of	Death	and	Life	in	the	Subtle	Bodies
	
The	soul	resides	within	two	bodies	–	the	subtle	body	and	the	gross	body.	At
the	 time	of	death,	 the	gross	body	dies.	The	body	which	 is	made	of	earth	and
water,	 the	 body	 which	 consists	 of	 flesh,	 bones	 and	 marrow,	 drops,	 dies.
Subsequently,	 the	 body	 comprised	 of	 subtle	 thoughts,	 subtle	 feelings,	 subtle
vibrations,	 subtle	 filaments,	 remains.	 This	 body,	 formed	 of	 all	 these	 subtle
things,	along	with	the	soul,	once	again	proceeds	on	a	journey,	and	again	enters
a	gross	body	for	a	new	birth.	When	a	new	soul	enters	 the	mother’s	womb,	 it
means	this	subtle	body	enters.
In	the	event	of	death	only	the	gross	body	disintegrates,	not	the	subtle	body.
But	with	the	occurrence	of	the	ultimate	death,	what	we	call	moksha,	the	subtle
body	disintegrates	along	with	 the	gross	body.	Then	there	 is	no	more	birth	for
the	soul.	Then	the	soul	becomes	one	with	the	whole.	This	happens	only	once.	It
is	like	a	drop	merging	into	the	ocean.
Three	 things	have	 to	be	understood.	First,	 there	 is	 the	element	of	 the	soul.
When	the	two	types	of	bodies	–	the	gross	and	the	subtle	–	come	in	contact	with
this	element	of	the	soul,	both	become	active.	We	are	familiar	with	the	gross,	the
physical	 body;	 a	 yogi	 is	 familiar	 with	 the	 subtle	 body,	 and	 those	 who	 go
beyond	yoga	are	familiar	with	the	soul.
Ordinary	eyes	are	able	to	see	the	gross	body.	The	yogic	eye	is	able	to	see	the
subtle	body.	But	that	which	is	beyond	yoga,	that	which	exists	beyond	the	subtle
body,	is	experienced	only	in	samadhi.	One	who	goes	beyond	meditation	attains
samadhi,	and	it	is	in	the	state	of	samadhi	that	one	experiences	the	divine.	The
ordinary	man	has	the	experience	of	the	physical	body,	the	ordinary	yogi	has	the
experience	of	 the	subtle	body,	 the	enlightened	yogi	has	 the	experience	of	 the
divine.	 Godliness	 is	 one,	 but	 there	 are	 countless	 subtle	 bodies	 and	 there	 are
countless	gross	bodies.
The	 subtle	 body	 is	 the	 causal	 body;	 it	 is	 this	 body	 that	 takes	 on	 the	 new
physical	 body.	You	 see	many	 light	 bulbs	 around	 here.	The	 electricity	 is	 one,
that	energy	is	one,	but	it	is	manifesting	through	different	bulbs.	The	bulbs	have
different	bodies,	but	their	soul	is	one.	Similarly,	the	consciousness	manifesting
through	us	is	one,	but	in	the	manifestation	of	this	consciousness,	two	vehicles
are	 applied.	One	 is	 the	 subtle	 vehicle,	 the	 subtle	 body;	 the	other	 is	 the	gross
vehicle,	the	gross	body.
Our	experience	is	limited	to	the	gross,	to	the	physical	body.	This	restricted
experience	 is	 the	 cause	 of	 all	 human	 misery	 and	 ignorance.	 But	 there	 are
people	who,	even	after	going	beyond	the	physical	body,	may	stop	at	the	subtle
body.	They	will	say,	“There	are	an	infinite	number	of	souls.”	But	those	who	go
beyond	 even	 the	 subtle	 body	 will	 say,	 “Godliness	 is	 one,	 the	 soul	 is	 one,
brahman	is	one.”
When	I	referred	to	the	entering	of	the	soul,	I	meant	that	soul	which	is	still
associated	with	the	subtle	body.	It	means	the	subtle	body	the	soul	is	enveloped
in	has	not	disintegrated	yet.	That’s	why	we	say	 that	 the	soul	which	attains	 to
the	ultimate	freedom	steps	out	of	the	cycle	of	birth	and	death.	There	is	indeed
no	birth	 and	death	 for	 the	 soul	–	 it	was	never	born,	nor	will	 it	 ever	die.	The
cycle	of	birth	and	death	stops	with	the	end	of	the	subtle	body,	because	it	is	the
subtle	body	that	causes	a	new	birth.
The	 subtle	 body	 is	 an	 integrated	 seed	 consisting	 of	 our	 thoughts,	 desires,
lusts,	longings,	experiences,	knowledge.	This	body	is	instrumental	in	taking	us
on	 our	 continuing	 journey.	However,	 one	whose	 thoughts	 are	 all	 annihilated,
whose	passions	have	all	vanished,	whose	desires	have	all	disappeared,	who	has
no	desire	left	within	him,	there	is	no	place	for	him	to	go,	there	is	no	reason	left
for	him	to	go	anywhere.	Then	there	is	no	reason	for	him	to	take	birth	again.
	
There	is	a	wonderful	story	in	the	life	of	Ramakrishna.	Those	who	were	close
to	him,	who	knew	him	 to	be	a	paramahansa,	 an	enlightened	one,	used	 to	be
deeply	troubled	about	one	thing.	It	bothered	them	greatly	to	see	an	enlightened
person	such	as	Ramakrishna	–	one	who	had	attained	samadhi	–	craving	food	so
much.	Ramakrishna	used	to	become	very	anxious	about	food.	He	would	often
enter	 the	 kitchen,	 asking	 his	 wife	 Sharda	Devi,	 “What’s	 cooking	 today?	 It’s
getting	so	 late!”	Right	 in	 the	middle	of	a	 serious	 talk	on	spiritual	matters,	he
would	 get	 up	 abruptly	 and	 rush	 toward	 the	 kitchen	 asking	 what	 was	 being
cooked,	start	looking	for	food.
Feeling	 embarrassed,	 Sharda	 would	 politely	 chide	 him,	 “What	 are	 you
doing?	What	must	people	 think	–	dropping	 the	 talk	on	brahman	 so	 suddenly
and	starting	to	talk	about	food!”	Ramakrishna	would	laugh	and	remain	silent.
Even	his	close	disciples	remonstrated	with	him.	They	would	say,	“It’s	giving
you	a	bad	name.	People	say,	‘How	can	such	a	person	have	attained	knowledge
when	his	desire	for	food	is	so	overwhelming?’”
One	day	his	wife	Sharda	got	very	upset	and	reproached	him.	Ramakrishna
told	her,	“You	have	no	idea,	but	the	day	I	show	an	aversion	to	food,	know	that	I
shall	not	live	more	than	three	days	afterward.”
Sharda	asked,	“What	do	you	mean?”
Ramakrishna	 said,	 “All	my	desires	 and	 passions	 have	 disappeared,	 all	my
thoughts	are	gone	–	but	for	the	good	of	mankind	I	am	deliberately	holding	on
to	this	one	desire	for	food.	It’s	like	a	boat	tied	down	with	one	last	rope.	Once
that	rope	is	cut	loose,	the	boat	will	move	on	to	its	endless	journey.	I	am	staying
on	with	effort.”
Perhaps	those	around	him	did	not	give	much	thought	to	this	at	the	time.	But
three	 days	 before	 Ramakrishna’s	 death,	 when	 Sharda	 entered	 with	 a	 dish	 of
food,	 Ramakrishna	 looked	 at	 it,	 shut	 his	 eyes,	 and	 lay	 with	 his	 back	 turned
toward	her.	 In	a	 flash	she	 remembered	Ramakrishna’s	words	about	his	death.
The	dish	fell	from	her	hands	and	she	began	to	weep	bitterly.	Ramakrishna	said,
“Don’t	cry.	You	wished	I	should	not	crave	for	food	–	your	wish	has	come	true.”
Exactly	three	days	after	this	incident	Ramakrishna	died.	He	was	holding	on
with	effort	to	just	a	little	bit	of	desire.	That	little	desire	had	become	the	support
for	 the	continuation	of	his	 life	 journey.	With	the	disappearance	of	 that	desire,
the	entire	support	ceased	to	exist.
	
Those	whom	we	call	the	tirthankaras,	those	whom	we	call	the	buddhas,	the
sons	 of	 God,	 the	 avatars	 –	 they	 hold	 on	 to	 only	 one	 desire.	 They	 keep	 the
desire	 solely	out	of	compassion,	 for	 the	good	and	well-being	of	all	mankind.
The	day	this	desire	is	lost,	they	cease	to	live	in	the	body	and	an	endless	journey
toward	 the	 infinite	 begins.	After	 that	 there	 is	 no	more	 birth,	 no	more	 death.
After	that	there	is	neither	one	nor	many.	What	remains	after	that	cannot,	in	any
way,	be	counted	in	numbers;	hence	those	who	know	don’t	even	say,	“Brahman
is	one,	the	divine	is	one.”	To	call	it	“one”	is	meaningless	when	there	is	no	way
to	 follow	 it	with	“two,”	when	one	can’t	count	any	 further	 in	 the	 sequence	of
two	and	three.	Saying	“one”	is	meaningful	only	as	long	as	two,	three	and	four
are	also	there.	“One”	is	significant	only	in	the	context	of	other	numbers.	That’s
why	those	who	know	don’t	even	say	brahman	is	one;	they	say	brahman	is	non-
dual,	he	is	not	two.
They	are	saying	something	quite	remarkable.	They	are	saying,	“Godliness	is
not	two;	there	is	no	way	you	can	count	godliness	in	terms	of	numbers.”	Even
calling	 it	 one	 we	 are	 attempting	 to	 count	 it	 in	 terms	 of	 numbers,	 which	 is
wrong.	But	to	experience	that	one	is	still	a	long	way.	Right	now	we	are	still	at
the	level	of	the	gross	body,	of	the	body	which	endlessly	takes	multiple	forms.
When	 we	 enter	 this	 body	 we	 find	 another	 body	 –	 the	 subtle	 body.	 Going
beyond	 this	 subtle	 body,	 we	 attain	 that	 which	 is	 not	 a	 body,	 that	 which	 is
bodiless	–	the	soul.
	
PART	II:	DIFFERENT	MAPS	FOR	DIFFERENT	PATHS
	
Chapter	7:	The	Heart	Sutra	and	the	Path	of	Buddha
Homage	to	the	perfection	of	wisdom,	the	lovely,	the	holy!
Avalokita,	the	holy	lord	and	bodhisattva,	was	moving	in	the	deep	course	of	the	wisdom
which	has	gone	beyond.	He	looked	down	from	on	high,	he	beheld	but	five	heaps,	and	he
saw	that	in	their	own	being	they	were	empty.
I	 salute	 the	buddha	within	you.	You	may	not	be	aware	of	 it,	 you	may	not
have	 ever	 dreamed	 about	 it	 –	 that	 you	 are	 a	 buddha,	 that	 nobody	 can	 be
anything	else,	that	buddhahood	is	the	very	essential	core	of	your	being,	that	it
is	not	something	to	happen	in	the	future,	that	it	has	happened	already.	It	is	the
very	 source	 you	 come	 from;	 it	 is	 the	 source	 and	 the	 goal	 too.	 It	 is	 from
buddhahood	 that	we	move,	 and	 it	 is	 to	 buddhahood	 that	we	move.	 This	 one
word,	buddhahood,	contains	all	–	 the	full	circle	of	 life,	 from	the	alpha	 to	 the
omega.
But	you	are	fast	asleep,	you	don’t	know	who	you	are.	Not	that	you	have	to
become	 a	 buddha,	 but	 only	 that	 you	 have	 to	 recognize	 it,	 that	 you	 have	 to
return	 to	 your	 own	 source,	 that	 you	 have	 to	 look	 within	 yourself.	 A
confrontation	with	yourself	will	reveal	your	buddhahood.	The	day	one	comes
to	 see	 oneself,	 the	 whole	 of	 existence	 becomes	 enlightened.	 It	 is	 not	 that	 a
person	becomes	enlightened	–	how	can	a	person	become	enlightened?	The	very
idea	of	being	a	person	 is	part	of	 the	unenlightened	mind.	 It	 is	not	 that	I	have
become	 enlightened;	 the	 “I”	 has	 to	 be	 dropped	 before	 one	 can	 become
enlightened,	 so	 how	 can	 I	 become	 enlightened?	That	 is	 absurdity.	 The	 day	 I
became	 enlightened,	 the	 whole	 of	 existence	 became	 enlightened.	 Since	 that
moment	 I	 have	not	 seen	 anything	other	 than	buddhas	–	 in	many	 forms,	with
many	names,	with	a	thousand	and	one	problems,	but	buddhas	still.
So	I	salute	the	buddha	within	you.
I	 am	 immensely	glad	 that	 so	many	buddhas	have	gathered	here.	The	very
fact	of	your	coming	here	to	me	is	the	beginning	of	the	recognition.	The	respect
in	your	heart	for	me,	the	love	in	your	heart	for	me,	is	respect	and	love	for	your
own	buddhahood.	The	trust	in	me	is	not	a	trust	in	something	extrinsic	to	you,
the	trust	in	me	is	self-trust.	By	trusting	me,	you	will	learn	to	trust	yourself.	By
coming	close	to	me,	you	will	come	close	to	yourself.	Only	a	recognition	has	to
be	attained.	The	diamond	 is	 there	–	you	have	 forgotten	about	 it,	or	you	have
never	remembered	it	from	the	very	beginning.
There	is	a	very	famous	saying	of	Emerson:	“Man	is	a	God	in	ruins.”	I	agree
and	I	disagree.	The	insight	has	some	truth	in	 it	–	man	is	not	as	he	should	be.
The	insight	is	 there	but	a	little	upside	down.	Man	is	not	God	in	ruins,	man	is
God	in	the	making;	man	is	a	budding	buddha.	The	bud	is	 there,	 it	can	bloom
any	moment:	just	a	little	effort,	just	a	little	help	is	needed.	And	the	help	is	not
going	to	cause	it	–	it	is	already	there!	Your	effort	is	only	going	to	reveal	it	to
you,	 help	 to	 unfold	 what	 is	 there,	 hidden.	 It	 is	 a	 discovery,	 but	 the	 truth	 is
already	there.	The	truth	is	eternal.
Listen	to	these	sutras	because	these	are	the	most	important	sutras	in	the	great
Buddhist	literature.	Hence	they	are	called	the	Heart	Sutra;	it	is	the	very	heart	of
the	Buddhist	message.
But	I	would	like	to	begin	from	the	very	beginning.	From	this	point	only	does
Buddhism	become	relevant:	let	it	be	there	in	your	heart	that	you	are	a	buddha.	I
know	 it	 may	 look	 presumptuous,	 it	 may	 look	 very	 hypothetical;	 you	 cannot
trust	 it	 totally.	That	 is	 natural,	 I	 understand	 it.	 Let	 it	 be	 there,	 but	 as	 a	 seed.
Around	 that	 fact	many	 things	will	 start	 happening,	 and	only	 around	 that	 fact
will	 you	 be	 able	 to	 understand	 these	 sutras.	 They	 are	 immensely	 powerful	 –
very	small,	very	condensed,	seedlike.	But	with	this	soil,	with	the	vision	in	the
mind	 that	 you	 are	 a	 buddha,	 that	 you	 are	 a	 budding	 buddha,	 that	 you	 are
potentially	capable	of	becoming	one,	that	nothing	is	lacking,	all	is	ready,	things
just	have	to	be	put	in	the	right	order,	that	a	little	more	awareness	is	needed,	a
little	more	consciousness	is	needed…	The	treasure	is	there;	you	have	to	bring	a
small	lamp	inside	your	house.	Once	the	darkness	disappears	you	will	no	longer
be	a	beggar,	you	will	be	a	buddha;	you	will	be	a	sovereign,	an	emperor.	This
whole	kingdom	is	yours	and	it	is	just	for	the	asking;	you	have	just	to	claim	it.
But	 you	 cannot	 claim	 it	 if	 you	 believe	 that	 you	 are	 a	 beggar.	You	 cannot
claim	 it,	 you	 cannot	 even	 dream	 about	 claiming	 if	 you	 think	 that	 you	 are	 a
beggar.	This	 idea	 that	you	are	a	beggar,	 that	you	are	 ignorant,	 that	you	are	a
sinner,	 has	 been	 preached	 from	 so	 many	 pulpits	 down	 the	 ages	 that	 it	 has
become	a	deep	hypnosis	in	you.	This	hypnosis	has	to	be	broken.	To	break	it,	I
start	with:	I	salute	the	buddha	within	you.
To	 me,	 you	 are	 buddhas.	 All	 your	 efforts	 to	 become	 enlightened	 are
ridiculous	 if	 you	 don’t	 accept	 this	 basic	 fact.	 This	 has	 to	 become	 a	 tacit
understanding,	 that	 you	are	 it!	 This	 is	 the	 right	 beginning,	 otherwise	 you	 go
astray.	This	is	the	right	beginning.	Start	with	this	vision,	and	don’t	be	worried
that	 this	may	 create	 some	 kind	 of	 ego:	 “I	 am	 a	 buddha.”	Don’t	 be	worried,
because	the	whole	process	of	the	Heart	Sutra	will	make	it	clear	to	you	that	the
ego	 is	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 doesn’t	 exist	 –	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 doesn’t	 exist!
Everything	else	is	real.
There	 have	 been	 teachers	 who	 say	 the	 world	 is	 illusory	 and	 the	 soul	 is
existential	–	the	“I”	is	true	and	all	else	is	illusory,	maya.	Buddha	says	just	the
reverse:	he	sees	only	the	“I”	is	untrue	and	everything	else	is	real.	And	I	agree
with	 Buddha	 more	 than	 with	 the	 other	 standpoint.	 Buddha’s	 insight	 is	 very
penetrating,	 the	most	 penetrating.	 Nobody	 has	 ever	 penetrated	 those	 realms,
depths	and	heights	of	reality.
But	start	with	the	idea,	with	this	climate	around	you,	with	this	vision.	Let	it
be	declared	to	every	cell	of	your	body	and	every	thought	of	your	mind;	let	it	be
declared	 to	 every	 nook	 and	 corner	 of	 your	 existence:	 “I	 am	 a	 buddha!”	And
don’t	be	worried	about	the	“I,”	we	will	take	care	of	it.
“I”	 and	buddhahood	cannot	 exist	 together.	Once	 the	buddhahood	becomes
revealed	 the	 “I”	 disappears,	 just	 like	 darkness	 disappears	 when	 you	 bring	 a
light	in.
Before	 entering	 the	 sutras,	 it	 will	 be	 helpful	 to	 understand	 a	 little
framework,	a	little	structure.
The	ancient	Buddhist	scriptures	talk	about	seven	temples.	Just	as	Sufis	talk
about	 seven	valleys,	and	Hindus	 talk	about	 seven	chakras,	 the	Buddhists	 talk
about	seven	temples.
The	 first	 temple	 is	 the	 physical,	 the	 second	 temple	 is	 psychosomatic,	 the
third	 temple	 is	 psychological,	 the	 fourth	 temple	 is	 psycho-spiritual,	 the	 fifth
temple	is	spiritual,	the	sixth	temple	is	spirituo-transcendental,	and	the	seventh
temple	and	the	ultimate	–	the	temple	of	temples	–	is	the	transcendental.
The	 sutras	 belong	 to	 the	 seventh.	 These	 are	 declarations	 of	 someone	who
has	 entered	 the	 seventh	 temple,	 the	 transcendental,	 the	 absolute.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	 of	 the	Sanskrit	word,	pragyaparamita	–	 the	wisdom	of	 the	 beyond,
from	the	beyond,	 in	 the	beyond;	 the	wisdom	that	comes	only	when	you	have
transcended	all	kinds	of	 identifications	–	 lower	or	higher,	 this	worldly	or	 that
worldly;	when	you	have	transcended	all	kinds	of	identifications,	when	you	are
not	identified	at	all,	when	there	is	only	a	pure	flame	of	awareness	left	with	no
smoke	around	it.	That’s	why	Buddhists	worship	this	small	book,	this	very,	very
small	book;	and	they	have	called	it	the	Heart	Sutra	–	the	very	heart	of	religion,
the	very	core.
The	 first	 temple,	 the	 physical,	 can	 correspond	 to	 the	Hindu	map	with	 the
muladhar	chakra;	the	second,	the	psychosomatic,	with	svadhisthan	chakra;	the
third,	 the	 psychological,	with	manipura;the	 fourth,	 the	 psycho-spiritual,	 with
anahata;the	 fifth,	 the	 spiritual,	 with	 vishuddha;the	 sixth,	 the	 spirituo-
transcendental,	with	agya;	and	the	seventh,	 the	 transcendental,	with	sahasrar.
Sahasrar	 means	 the	 one-thousand-petaled	 lotus.	 That	 is	 the	 symbol	 of	 the
ultimate	 flowering:	 nothing	 has	 remained	 hidden,	 all	 has	 become	 unhidden,
manifest.	 The	 thousand-petaled	 lotus	 has	 opened	 and	 the	whole	 sky	 is	 filled
with	its	fragrance,	its	beauty,	its	benediction.
In	 the	modern	world,	 a	 great	work	 has	 started	 in	 search	 of	 the	 innermost
core	of	the	human	being.	It	will	be	good	to	understand	how	far	modern	efforts
lead	us.
Pavlov,	B.	F.	Skinner	and	 the	other	behaviorists,	go	on	circling	around	the
physical,	the	muladhar.	They	think	man	is	only	the	body.	They	get	so	involved
in	 the	 first	 temple,	 they	 get	 so	 involved	 with	 the	 physical	 that	 they	 forget
everything	 else.	 These	 people	 are	 trying	 to	 explain	 man	 only	 through	 the
physical,	the	material.	This	attitude	becomes	a	hindrance	because	they	are	not
open.	When	from	the	very	beginning	you	deny	that	there	is	anything	other	than
the	 body,	 then	 you	 deny	 the	 exploration	 itself.	 This	 becomes	 a	 prejudice.	 A
Communist,	a	Marxist,	a	behaviorist,	an	atheist	–	people	who	believe	that	man
is	only	 the	body	–	 their	very	belief	 closes	 the	doors	 to	higher	 realities.	They
become	blind.	And	 the	physical	 is	 there,	 the	physical	 is	 the	most	apparent;	 it
needs	no	proof.	The	physical	body	is	 there,	you	need	not	prove	it.	Because	it
need	not	be	proved,	 it	 becomes	 the	only	 reality.	That	 is	nonsense.	Then	man
loses	all	dignity.	If	there	is	nothing	to	grow	in	or	to	grow	toward,	there	cannot
be	any	dignity	in	life.	Then	man	becomes	a	thing.	Then	you	are	not	an	opening,
then	nothing	more	is	going	to	happen	to	you	–	you	are	a	body:	you	will	eat	and
you	 will	 defecate,	 and	 you	 will	 eat	 and	 you	 will	 make	 love	 and	 produce
children,	and	this	will	go	on	and	on,	and	one	day	you	will	die.	A	mechanical
repetition	of	the	mundane,	the	trivia	–	how	can	there	be	any	significance,	any
meaning,	any	poetry?	How	can	there	be	any	dance?
Skinner	 has	 written	 a	 book,	 Beyond	 Freedom	 and	 Dignity.	 It	 should	 be
called	Below	Freedom	 and	Dignity,	 not	Beyond.	 It	 is	 below,	 it	 is	 the	 lowest
standpoint	 about	 man,	 the	 ugliest.	 There	 is	 nothing	 wrong	 with	 the	 body,
remember.	 I	 am	 not	 against	 the	 body,	 it	 is	 a	 beautiful	 temple.	 The	 ugliness
enters	when	you	think	it	is	all.
Man	 can	 be	 conceived	 of	 as	 a	 ladder	 with	 seven	 rungs,	 and	 you	 become
identified	with	the	first	rung.	Then	you	are	not	going	anywhere.	And	the	ladder
is	 there,	 and	 the	 ladder	 bridges	 this	 world	 and	 the	 other;	 the	 ladder	 bridges
matter	 with	 godliness.	 The	 first	 rung	 is	 perfectly	 good	 if	 it	 is	 used	 in
relationship	 to	 the	whole	 ladder.	 If	 it	 functions	as	a	 first	 step	 it	 is	 immensely
beautiful:	one	should	be	thankful	to	the	body.	But	if	you	start	worshipping	the
first	 rung	 and	you	 forget	 the	 remaining	 six,	 you	 forget	 that	 the	whole	 ladder
exists	and	you	become	closed,	confined	to	the	first	rung,	then	it	is	no	longer	a
rung	at	all	–	because	a	rung	is	a	rung	only	when	it	is	part	of	a	ladder.	If	it	is	no
longer	a	 rung	 then	you	are	stuck	with	 it.	Hence,	people	who	are	materialistic
are	always	stuck,	 they	always	 feel	 something	 is	missing,	 they	don’t	 feel	 they
are	going	anywhere.	They	move	in	rounds,	in	circles,	and	they	come	again	and
again	 to	 the	 same	 point.	 They	 become	 tired	 and	 bored.	 They	 start
contemplating	how	to	commit	suicide.	And	their	whole	effort	in	life	is	to	find
some	sensations,	so	something	new	can	happen.	But	what	“new”	can	happen?
All	the	things	that	we	go	on	being	occupied	with	are	nothing	but	toys	to	play
with.
Think	 of	 these	 words	 of	 Frank	 Sheed:	 “The	 soul	 of	 man	 is	 crying	 for
purpose	or	meaning.	And	the	scientist	says,	 ‘Here	 is	a	 telephone.’	Or,	 ‘Look!
Television!’	–	 exactly	 as	one	 tries	 to	distract	 a	baby	crying	 for	 its	mother	by
offering	 it	 sugar	 sticks	 and	making	 funny	 faces	 at	 it.	 The	 leaping	 stream	 of
invention	has	 served	extraordinarily	well	 to	keep	man	occupied,	 to	keep	him
from	remembering	that	which	is	troubling	him.”
All	that	the	modern	world	has	provided	you	with	is	nothing	but	sugar	sticks,
toys	to	play	with	–	and	you	were	crying	for	your	mother,	you	were	crying	for
love,	 and	 you	were	 crying	 for	 consciousness,	 and	 you	were	 crying	 for	 some
significance	in	life.	And	they	say,	“Look!	The	telephone.	Look!	The	television.
Look!	 We	 have	 brought	 so	 many	 beautiful	 things	 for	 you.”	 And	 you	 play
around	a	 little	bit;	 again	you	become	 fed	up,	 again	you	are	bored,	 and	again
they	go	on	searching	for	new	toys	for	you	to	play	with.
This	 state	 of	 affairs	 is	 ridiculous.	 It	 is	 so	 absurd	 that	 it	 seems	 almost
inconceivable	how	we	go	on	living	in	it.	We	are	caught	at	the	first	rung.
Remember	that	you	are	in	the	body,	but	you	are	not	the	body;	let	that	be	a
continuous	awareness	in	you.	You	live	in	the	body,	and	the	body	is	a	beautiful
abode.	Remember,	I	am	not	for	a	single	moment	hinting	that	you	become	anti-
body,	 that	 you	 start	 denying	 the	body	as	 the	 so-called	 spiritualists	 have	done
down	the	ages.	The	materialists	go	on	thinking	that	the	body	is	all	that	is,	and
there	are	people	who	move	to	the	opposite	extreme,	and	they	start	saying	that
the	 body	 is	 illusory,	 the	 body	 is	 not:	 “Destroy	 the	 body	 so	 the	 illusion	 is
destroyed,	and	you	can	become	really	real.”
This	other	extreme	is	a	reaction.	The	materialist	creates	his	own	reaction	in
the	 spiritualist,	 but	 they	 are	 partners	 in	 the	 same	 business;	 they	 are	 not	 very
different	 people.	 The	 body	 is	 beautiful,	 the	 body	 is	 real,	 the	 body	 has	 to	 be
lived,	the	body	has	to	be	loved.	The	body	is	a	great	gift	of	existence.	Not	for	a
single	moment	 be	 against	 it,	 and	 not	 for	 a	 single	moment	 think	 that	 you	 are
only	it.	You	are	far	bigger.	Use	the	body	as	a	jumping	board.
The	second	temple	is:	psychosomatic,	svadhisthan.	Freudian	psychoanalysis
functions	there.	It	goes	a	little	higher	than	Skinner	and	Pavlov.	Freud	enters	the
mysteries	of	the	psychological	a	little	bit	more.	He’s	not	just	a	behaviorist,	but
he	never	goes	beyond	dreams.	He	goes	on	analyzing	dreams.
The	dream	exists	as	an	illusion	in	you.	It	is	indicative,	it	is	symbolic;	it	has	a
message	from	the	unconscious	to	be	revealed	to	the	conscious.	But	there	is	no
point	in	just	getting	caught	in	it.	Use	the	dream,	but	don’t	become	the	dream.
You	are	not	the	dream.
And	there	is	no	need	to	make	so	much	fuss	about	it,	as	Freudians	do.	Their
whole	 effort	 seems	 to	be	moving	 in	 the	dimension	of	 the	dream	world.	Take
note	of	 it,	 take	a	very,	very	clear	standpoint	about	 it,	understand	 its	message;
and	 there	 is	 really	no	need	 to	go	 to	anybody	else	 for	your	dream	analysis.	 If
you	cannot	analyze	your	dream,	nobody	else	can	because	your	dream	is	your
dream.	And	your	dream	is	so	personal	that	nobody	else	can	dream	the	way	you
dream.	Nobody	has	ever	dreamed	the	way	you	dream,	nobody	will	ever	dream
the	way	you	dream;	nobody	can	explain	it	to	you.	His	interpretation	will	be	his
interpretation.	Only	you	can	look	into	it.	And	in	fact	there	is	no	need	to	analyze
a	dream:	look	at	the	dream	in	its	totality,	with	clarity,	with	alertness,	and	you
will	see	the	message.	It	 is	so	loud!	There	is	no	need	to	go	for	psychoanalysis
for	three,	four,	five,	seven	years.
A	 person	 who	 is	 dreaming	 every	 night,	 and	 in	 the	 day	 is	 going	 to	 the
psychoanalyst	to	be	analyzed,	becomes	by	and	by	surrounded	by	dreamy-stuff.
Just	 as	 the	 first	 becomes	 too	 obsessed	 with	 the	muladhar,	 the	 physical,	 the
second	becomes	too	obsessed	with	the	sexual	–	because	the	second,	the	realm
of	 psychosomatic	 reality,	 is	 sex.	 The	 second	 starts	 interpreting	 everything	 in
terms	of	sex.	Whatsoever	you	do,	go	 to	 the	Freudian	and	he	will	 reduce	 it	 to
sex.	Nothing	higher	exists	for	him.	He	lives	in	the	mud,	he	does	not	believe	in
the	 lotus.	Bring	 a	 lotus	 flower	 to	 him,	 he	will	 look	 at	 it	 and	 reduce	 it	 to	 the
mud.	He	will	say,	“This	is	nothing,	this	is	just	dirty	mud.	Has	it	not	come	out	of
dirty	mud?	If	it	has	come	out	of	dirty	mud,	then	it	has	to	be	dirty	mud.”	Reduce
everything	to	its	cause,	and	that	is	the	real.
Then	every	poem	is	 reduced	 to	sex,	everything	beautiful	 is	 reduced	 to	sex
and	perversion	and	repression.	Michelangelo	is	a	great	artist?	Then	his	art	has
to	be	reduced	to	some	sexuality.	And	Freudians	go	to	absurd	lengths.	They	say
all	 the	 great	 works	 of	 art	 by	Michelangelo	 or	Goethe	 or	 Byron	which	 bring
great	joy	to	millions	of	people,	are	nothing	but	repressed	sex	–	maybe	Goethe
was	going	to	masturbate	and	was	stopped.
Millions	 of	 people	 are	 stopped	 from	masturbation,	 but	 they	 don’t	 become
Goethes.	It	is	absurd.	But	Freud	is	the	master	of	the	world	of	the	toilet.	He	lives
there,	 that	 is	 his	 temple.	 Art	 becomes	 pathology,	 poetry	 becomes	 pathology,
everything	becomes	perversion.	If	Freudian	analysis	succeeds,	 then	there	will
be	 no	 Kalidas,	 no	 Shakespeare,	 no	 Michelangelo,	 no	 Mozart,	 no	 Wagner,
because	 everybody	will	 be	 normal.	 These	 are	 abnormal	 people,	 these	 people
are	 psychologically	 ill,	 according	 to	 Freud.	 The	 greatest	 are	 reduced	 to	 the
lowest.	 Buddha	 is	 ill,	 according	 to	 Freud,	 because	 whatsoever	 he	 is	 talking
about	is	nothing	but	repressed	sex.
This	approach	reduces	human	greatness	to	ugliness.	Beware	of	it.	Buddha	is
not	 ill;	 in	 fact,	 Freud	 is	 ill.	 The	 silence	 of	 Buddha,	 the	 joy	 of	 Buddha,	 the
celebration	of	Buddha	is	not	ill,	it	is	the	full	flowering	of	well-being.
But	to	Freud	the	normal	person	is	one	who	has	never	sang	a	song,	who	has
never	danced,	who	has	never	celebrated,	never	prayed,	never	meditated,	never
done	 anything	 creative,	 is	 just	 normal:	 goes	 to	 the	 office,	 comes	 home,	 eats,
drinks,	sleeps,	and	dies;	leaves	not	a	trace	behind	of	his	creativity,	leaves	not	a
single	signature	anywhere.	This	normal	man	seems	to	be	very	mediocre,	dull,
and	dead.	There	is	a	suspicion	about	Freud	that	because	he	himself	could	not
create	–	he	was	an	uncreative	person	–	he	was	condemning	creativity	itself	as
pathology.	There	 is	 every	possibility	 that	he	was	 a	mediocre	person.	 It	 is	 his
mediocreness	which	feels	offended	by	all	the	great	people	of	the	world.
The	mediocre	 mind	 is	 trying	 to	 reduce	 all	 greatness.	 The	mediocre	 mind
cannot	 accept	 that	 there	 can	 be	 any	 greater	 being	 than	 him.	That	 hurts.	 This
whole	 psychoanalysis	 and	 its	 interpretation	 of	 human	 life	 is	 revenge	 by	 the
mediocre.	Beware	of	it.	It	is	better	than	the	first,	yes,	a	little	ahead	of	the	first,
but	one	has	to	go,	and	go	on	going,	beyond	and	beyond.
The	third	is	psychological.	Adler	lives	in	the	world	of	the	psychological,	the
will	to	power;	at	least	something	–	very	egoistic,	but	at	least	something;	a	little
more	open	than	Freud.	But	the	problem	is,	just	like	Freud	reduces	everything	to
sex,	Adler	reduces	everything	to	the	inferiority	complex.	People	try	to	become
great	 because	 they	 feel	 inferior.	 A	 person	 trying	 to	 become	 enlightened	 is	 a
person	who	is	feeling	inferior,	and	a	person	trying	to	become	enlightened	is	a
person	who	is	on	a	power	trip.
This	is	utterly	wrong,	because	we	have	seen	people	–	a	Buddha,	a	Christ,	a
Krishna	 –	 who	 are	 so	 utterly	 surrendered	 that	 their	 trip	 cannot	 be	 called	 a
power	trip.	And	when	Buddha	blooms	he	has	no	ideas	of	superiority,	not	at	all.
He	bows	down	to	the	whole	of	existence.	He	has	not	that	idea	of	holier-than-
thou,	 not	 at	 all.	 Everything	 is	 holy,	 even	 the	 dust	 is	 divine.	 No,	 he	 is	 not
thinking	himself	superior,	and	he	was	not	striving	to	become	superior.	He	was
not	 feeling	 inferior	 at	 all.	 He	 was	 born	 a	 king;	 there	 was	 no	 question	 of
inferiority.	He	was	at	the	top	from	the	very	beginning,	there	was	no	question	of
inferiority.	He	was	the	richest	man	in	his	country,	the	most	powerful	man	in	his
country:	there	was	no	more	power	to	be	attained,	no	more	riches	to	be	attained.
He	was	one	of	the	most	beautiful	men	ever	born	on	this	earth,	he	had	one	of	the
most	beautiful	women	as	his	beloved.	All	was	available	to	him.
But	Adler	would	go	on	searching	for	some	inferiority	because	he	could	not
believe	that	a	man	could	have	any	goal	other	than	the	ego.	It	is	better	–	better
than	Freud,	a	little	higher.	Ego	is	a	little	higher	than	sex;	not	much	higher,	but	a
little.
The	fourth	is	psycho-spiritual,	anahata,	the	heart	center.	Jung,	Assagioli	and
others	penetrate	that	realm.	They	go	higher	than	Pavlov,	Freud	and	Adler,	they
open	 more	 possibilities.	 They	 accept	 the	 world	 of	 the	 irrational,	 the
unconscious:	 they	 don’t	 confine	 themselves	 to	 reason.	 They	 are	 more
reasonable	people	–	they	accept	“irreason”	too.	The	irrational	is	not	denied	but
accepted.	This	is	where	modern	psychology	stops	–	at	the	fourth	rung.	And	the
fourth	rung	is	 just	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	whole	 ladder:	 three	rungs	on	this	side
and	three	rungs	on	that	side.
Modern	 psychology	 is	 not	 yet	 a	 complete	 science.	 It	 is	 hanging	 in	 the
middle.	It	is	very	shaky,	not	certain	about	anything.	It	is	more	hypothetical	than
experiential.	It	is	still	struggling	to	be.
The	 fifth	 is	 spiritual:	 Islam,	 Hinduism,	 Christianity	 –	 the	 mass-organized
religions	 remain	 stuck	with	 the	 fifth.	They	don’t	go	beyond	 the	 spiritual.	All
the	organized	religions,	the	churches,	remain	there.
The	sixth	is	the	spirituo-transcendental	–	yoga	and	other	methods.	All	over
the	world,	down	the	ages,	many	methods	have	been	developed	which	are	less
like	a	church	organization,	which	are	not	dogmatic	but	are	more	experiential.
You	 have	 to	 do	 something	 with	 your	 body	 and	 mind;	 you	 have	 to	 create	 a
certain	harmony	within	yourself	so	that	you	can	ride	on	that	harmony,	you	can
ride	on	that	cloud	of	harmony	and	go	far	away	from	your	ordinary	reality.	Yoga
can	comprehend	all	that;	that	is	the	sixth.
And	the	seventh	is	transcendental:	Tantra,	Tao,	Zen.	Buddha’s	attitude	is	of
the	seventh	–	pragyaparamita.	It	means	wisdom	that	is	transcendental,	wisdom
that	 comes	 to	you	only	when	all	 the	bodies	have	been	crossed	and	you	have
become	just	a	pure	awareness,	just	a	witness,	pure	subjectivity.
Unless	 man	 reaches	 the	 transcendental,	 he	 will	 have	 to	 be	 provided	 with
toys,	sugar	sticks.	He	will	have	to	be	provided	with	false	meanings.
Just	the	other	day	I	came	across	an	American	car	advertisement.	On	top	of	a
beautiful	car	 it	says:	“Something	to	believe	in.”	Man	has	never	fallen	so	low.
Something	 to	 believe	 in!	You	believe	 in	 a	 car?	Yes,	 people	 believe	 –	 people
believe	in	their	houses,	people	believe	in	their	cars,	people	believe	in	their	bank
balances.	If	you	look	around	you	will	be	surprised	–	God	has	disappeared,	but
belief	has	not	disappeared.	God	is	no	longer	there:	now	there	is	a	Cadillac	or	a
Lincoln!	God	 has	 disappeared	 but	man	 has	 created	 new	 gods	 –	 Stalin,	Mao.
God	has	disappeared	and	man	has	created	new	gods	–	movie	stars.
This	is	for	the	first	time	in	the	history	of	human	consciousness	that	man	has
fallen	so	 low.	And	even	 if	sometimes	you	remember	God,	 it	 is	 just	an	empty
word.	Maybe	when	you	are	in	pain,	maybe	when	you	are	frustrated,	then	you
use	God	–	as	if	God	is	aspirin.	That’s	what	the	so-called	religions	have	made
you	 believe:	 they	 say,	 “Take	God	 three	 times	 a	 day	 and	 you	won’t	 feel	 any
pain!”	So	whenever	you	are	in	pain	you	remember	God.	God	is	not	an	aspirin,
God	is	not	a	painkiller.
A	 few	 people	 remember	 God	 habitually,	 a	 few	 others	 remember	 God
professionally.	A	priest	 remembers	 professionally.	He	has	 nothing	 to	 do	with
God,	 he	 is	 paid	 for	 it.	 He	 has	 become	 proficient.	 A	 few	 people	 remember
habitually,	a	 few	professionally,	but	nobody	seems	 to	 remember	God	 in	deep
love.	 A	 few	 people	 invoke	 his	 name	 when	 they	 are	 miserable;	 nobody
remembers	him	when	they	are	in	joy,	celebrating.	And	that	is	the	right	moment
to	remember	–	because	only	when	you	are	joyous,	immensely	joyous,	are	you
close	 to	 God.	 When	 you	 are	 in	 misery	 you	 are	 far	 away,	 when	 you	 are	 in
misery	you	 are	 closed.	When	you	 are	 happy	you	 are	 open,	 flowing;	 you	 can
hold	God’s	hand.
So	 you	 remember	 habitually	 because	 you	 have	 been	 taught	 from	 very
childhood	 –	 it	 has	 become	 a	 kind	 of	 habit,	 like	 smoking.	 If	 you	 smoke	 you
don’t	enjoy	it	much;	if	you	don’t	smoke	you	feel	you	are	missing	something.	If
you	remember	God	every	morning,	every	evening,	nothing	is	attained	because
the	 remembrance	 is	not	of	 the	heart	–	 just	verbal,	mental,	mechanical.	But	 if
you	don’t	 remember,	you	start	 feeling	 something	 is	missing.	 It	has	become	a
ritual.	Beware	of	making	God	a	 ritual,	 and	beware	of	 becoming	professional
about	it.
I	have	heard	a	very	famous	story:
	
The	story	is	about	a	great	yogi,	very	famous,	who	was	promised	by	a	king
that	if	he	could	go	into	deep	samadhi	and	remain	under	the	earth	for	one	year,
the	king	would	give	him	the	best	horse	in	the	kingdom	as	a	reward.	The	king
knew	that	the	yogi	had	a	soft	heart	for	horses,	he	was	a	great	lover	of	horses.
The	yogi	agreed;	he	was	buried	alive	for	a	year.	But	in	the	course	of	the	year
the	kingdom	was	overthrown	and	nobody	remembered	to	dig	up	the	yogi.
About	ten	years	later	someone	remembered:	“What	happened	to	the	yogi?”
The	king	sent	a	few	people	to	find	out.	The	yogi	was	dug	up;	he	was	still	in	his
deep	 trance.	A	 previously	 agreed	 to	mantra	was	whispered	 in	 his	 ear	 and	 he
was	roused,	and	the	first	thing	he	said	was,	“Where	is	my	horse?”
	
Ten	years	of	remaining	in	silence	underneath	the	earth,	but	the	mind	has	not
changed	 at	 all	 –	 “Where	 is	 my	 horse?”	 Was	 this	 man	 really	 in	 trance,	 in
samadhi?	Was	he	thinking	about	God?	He	must	have	been	thinking	about	the
horse.	But	 he	was	 professionally	 proficient,	 skillful.	He	must	 have	 learned	 a
technique	 to	 stop	 the	 breathing	 and	 to	 go	 into	 a	 kind	 of	 death	 –	 but	 it	 was
technical.
Remaining	ten	years	in	such	deep	silence,	and	the	mind	has	not	changed	a
little	bit!	It	 is	exactly	the	same	as	if	these	ten	years	had	not	passed	by.	If	you
technically	 remember	 God,	 if	 you	 professionally	 remember	 God,	 habitually,
mechanically	remember	God,	then	nothing	is	going	to	happen.	All	is	possible,
but	all	possibilities	go	through	the	heart.	Hence	the	name	of	this	scripture:	the
Heart	Sutra.
Unless	you	do	something	with	great	love,	with	great	involvement,	with	great
commitment,	with	sincerity,	with	authenticity,	with	your	total	being,	nothing	is
going	to	happen.
For	some	people	religion	is	like	an	artificial	limb:	it	has	neither	warmth	nor
life.	 And	 although	 it	 helps	 them	 to	 stumble	 along,	 it	 never	 becomes	 part	 of
them;	it	must	be	strapped	on	each	day.
Remember,	 this	 has	 happened	 to	millions	 of	 people	 on	 the	 earth,	 this	 can
happen	to	you	too.	Don’t	create	an	artificial	 limb,	 let	real	 limbs	grow	in	you.
Only	then	will	your	life	have	a	warmth,	only	then	will	your	life	have	joy	–	not
a	false	smile	on	the	lips,	not	a	pseudo	kind	of	happiness	that	you	pretend	to,	not
a	mask,	but	in	reality.	Ordinarily	you	go	on	wearing	things:	somebody	wears	a
beautiful	smile,	somebody	wears	a	very	compassionate	face,	somebody	wears	a
very,	very	loving	personality	–	but	these	are	like	clothes	that	you	put	on.	Deep
down	you	remain	the	same.
These	sutras	can	become	a	revolution.
The	first	thing,	the	beginning,	is	always	the	question,	“Who	am	I?”	And	one
has	 to	 go	 on	 asking.	 When	 first	 you	 ask,	 “Who	 am	 I?”	 the	muladhar	 will
answer,	“You	are	a	body!	What	nonsense!	There	is	no	need	to	ask,	you	know	it
already.”	Then	the	second	will	say,	“You	are	sexuality.”	Then	the	third	will	say,
“You	are	a	power	trip,	an	ego”	–	and	so	on	and	so	forth.
Remember,	 you	 have	 to	 stop	 only	 when	 there	 is	 no	 answer	 coming,	 not
before.	If	some	answer	is	coming:	“You	are	this,	you	are	this,”	then	know	well
that	some	center	is	providing	you	with	an	answer.	When	all	the	six	centers	have
been	crossed	and	all	 their	answers	canceled,	you	go	on	asking,	“Who	am	I?”
and	no	answer	comes	from	anywhere,	it	is	utter	silence.	Your	question	resounds
in	yourself:	“Who	am	I?”	and	there	is	silence,	no	answer	arises	from	anywhere,
from	any	corner.	You	are	absolutely	present,	absolutely	silent,	and	there	is	not
even	a	vibration.	“Who	am	I?”	–	and	only	silence.	Then	a	miracle	happens:	you
cannot	even	formulate	the	question.	Answers	have	become	absurd;	then	finally
the	 question	 also	 becomes	 absurd.	 First	 answers	 disappear,	 then	 the	 question
also	disappears	–	because	they	can	live	only	together.	They	are	like	two	sides
of	 a	 coin	 –	 if	 one	 side	 has	 gone,	 the	 other	 cannot	 be	 retained.	 First	 answers
disappear,	 then	 the	 question	 disappears.	 And	 with	 the	 disappearance	 of
question	and	answer,	you	come	to	realize:	that	is	transcendental.	You	know,	yet
you	 cannot	 say;	 you	 know,	 yet	 you	 cannot	 be	 articulate	 about	 it.	 You	 know
from	 your	 very	 being	 who	 you	 are,	 but	 it	 cannot	 be	 verbalized.	 It	 is	 life-
knowledge;	it	 is	not	scriptural,	 it	 is	not	borrowed,	it	 is	not	from	others.	It	has
arisen	in	you.
And	 with	 this	 arising,	 you	 are	 a	 buddha.	 And	 then	 you	 start	 laughing
because	 you	 come	 to	 know	 that	 you	 have	 been	 a	 buddha	 from	 the	 very
beginning;	you	had	 just	never	 looked	so	deep.	You	were	 running	around	and
around	outside	your	being,	you	had	never	come	home.
	
The	philosopher,	Arthur	Schopenhauer,	was	walking	down	a	 lonely	 street.
Buried	in	thought,	he	accidentally	bumped	into	another	pedestrian.	Angered	by
the	jolt	and	the	apparent	unconcern	of	the	philosopher,	the	pedestrian	shouted,
“Well!	Who	do	you	think	you	are?”
Still	lost	in	thought	the	philosopher	said,	“Who	am	I?	How	I	wish	I	knew.”
	
Nobody	knows.	Knowing	this	–	I	don’t	know	who	I	am	–	the	journey	starts.
The	first	sutra:
Homage	to	the	perfection	of	wisdom,	the	lovely,	the	holy!
This	 is	 an	 invocation.	 All	 Indian	 scriptures	 start	 with	 an	 invocation	 for	 a
certain	reason.	This	is	not	so	in	other	countries	and	in	other	languages;	this	is
not	 so	 in	 Greece.	 The	 Indian	 understanding	 is	 that	 we	 are	 hollow	 bamboos,
only	the	infinite	flows	through	us.	The	infinite	has	to	be	invoked;	we	become
just	instruments	to	it.	We	invoke	it,	we	call	it	forth	to	flow	through	us.	That’s
why	nobody	knows	who	wrote	this	Heart	Sutra.	It	has	not	been	signed	because
the	person	who	wrote	it	didn’t	believe	that	he	was	the	author	of	it.	He	was	just
instrumental.	He	was	 just	 like	a	steno;	 the	dictation	was	from	beyond.	 It	was
dictated	to	him,	he	has	faithfully	written	it,	but	he	is	not	the	author	of	it	–	at	the
most,	just	the	writer.
Homage	 to	 the	 perfection	 of	 wisdom,	 the	 lovely,	 the	 holy!	 This	 is	 the
invocation,	a	few	words,	but	every	word	is	very,	very	pregnant	with	meaning.
Homage	 to	 the	 perfection	 of	 wisdom…“Perfection	 of	 wisdom”	 is	 the
translation	of	pragyaparamita.	Pragya	means	wisdom.	Remember,	it	does	not
mean	 knowledge.	 Knowledge	 is	 that	 which	 comes	 through	 the	 mind,
knowledge	is	that	which	comes	from	the	outside.	Knowledge	is	never	original.
It	can’t	be	original,	by	its	very	nature;	it	is	borrowed.	Wisdom	is	your	original
vision:	 it	 does	 not	 come	 from	 the	 outside,	 it	 grows	 in	 you.	 It	 is	 not	 like	 an
artificial	plastic	flower	that	you	go	to	the	market	and	purchase.	It	is	a	real	rose
that	grows	on	the	tree,	through	the	tree.	It	is	the	song	of	the	tree.	It	comes	from
its	innermost	core;	it	arises	from	its	depth	.	One	day	it	is	unexpressed,	another
day	 it	 is	 expressed;	 one	 day	 it	 was	 unmanifest,	 another	 day	 it	 has	 become
manifest.
Pragya	 means	 wisdom,	 but	 in	 the	 English	 language	 even	 wisdom	 has	 a
different	connotation.	In	English,	knowledge	means	without	experience:	you	go
to	the	university,	you	gather	knowledge.	Wisdom	means	you	go	to	life	and	you
gather	 experience.	 So	 a	 young	 man	 can	 be	 knowledgeable	 but	 never	 wise,
because	wisdom	needs	time.	A	young	man	can	have	degrees:	he	can	be	a	PhD
or	a	DLitt	–	 that	 is	not	difficult	–	but	only	an	old	man	can	be	wise.	Wisdom
means	knowledge	gathered	 through	one’s	own	experience,	but	 it	 is	 still	 from
the	outside.
Pragya	 is	 neither	 knowledge	 nor	wisdom	 as	 ordinarily	 understood.	 It	 is	 a
flowering	within	–	not	through	experience,	not	through	others,	not	through	life
and	life’s	encounters,	no,	but	just	by	going	within	in	utter	silence,	and	allowing
that	 which	 is	 hidden	 there	 to	 explode.	 You	 are	 carrying	 wisdom	 as	 a	 seed
within	you;	it	just	needs	the	right	soil	so	that	it	can	sprout.	Wisdom	is	always
original.	It	is	always	yours,	and	only	yours.
But	remember	again,	when	I	say	“yours”	I	don’t	mean	that	there	is	any	ego
involved	in	it.	It	is	yours	in	the	sense	that	it	comes	out	of	your	self-nature,	but	it
has	no	claim	 to	 the	ego	–	because	again	ego	 is	part	of	 the	mind,	not	of	your
inner	 silence.	Paramita	means	 of	 the	 beyond,	 from	 the	 beyond,	 beyond	 time
and	space;	when	you	move	to	a	state	where	time	disappears,	when	you	move	to
an	 inner	 place	where	 space	disappears,	when	you	don’t	 know	where	you	 are
and	when,	when	both	references	have	disappeared.	Time	is	outside	you,	so	is
space	outside	you.	There	is	a	crossing	point	within	you	where	time	disappears.
Somebody	asked	Jesus,	“Tell	us	something	about	the	kingdom	of	God.	What
will	be	 special	 there?”	 Jesus	 is	 reported	 to	have	said,	 “There	will	be	 time	no
longer.”	There	is	eternity,	a	timeless	moment.	That	is	the	beyond	–	a	spaceless
space	and	a	 timeless	moment.	You	are	no	longer	confined,	so	you	cannot	say
where	you	are.
Now	 look	 at	 me:	 I	 cannot	 say	 I	 am	 here,	 because	 I	 am	 there	 too.	 And	 I
cannot	say	I	am	in	India,	because	I	am	in	China	too.	And	I	cannot	say	that	I	am
on	this	planet,	because	I	am	not.	When	the	ego	disappears	you	are	simply	one
with	the	whole.	You	are	everywhere	and	nowhere.	You	don’t	exist	as	a	separate
entity,	you	are	dissolved.
Look!	In	the	morning,	on	a	beautiful	leaf,	there	is	a	dewdrop	shining	in	the
morning	sun,	utterlybeautiful.	And	 then	 it	 starts	 slipping,	and	 it	 slips	 into	 the
ocean.	It	was	there	on	the	leaf:	there	was	time	and	space,	it	had	a	definition,	a
personality	of	its	own.	Now	once	it	has	dropped	into	the	ocean	you	cannot	find
it	 anywhere	 –	 not	 because	 it	 has	 become	 nonexistential,	 no.	 Now	 it	 is
everywhere;	 that’s	 why	 you	 cannot	 find	 it	 anywhere.	 You	 cannot	 locate	 it
because	 the	 whole	 ocean	 has	 become	 its	 location.	 Now	 it	 doesn’t	 exist
separately.
When	 you	 don’t	 exist	 in	 separation	 from	 the	 whole,	 there	 arises
pragyaparamita,	 the	 wisdom	 that	 is	 perfect,	 the	 wisdom	 that	 is	 from	 the
beyond.
Homage	 to	 the	 perfection	 of	 wisdom,	 the	 lovely,	 the	 holy!	 A	 beautiful
provocation.	It	says:	my	homage	is	to	the	wisdom	that	comes	when	you	move
into	 the	 beyond.	 And	 it	 is	 lovely,	 and	 it	 is	 holy	 –	 holy	 because	 you	 have
become	one	with	 the	whole;	 lovely	 because	 the	 ego	 that	 created	 all	 kinds	 of
ugliness	in	your	life	is	no	more.
Satyam,	shivam,	sundaram:it	is	true,	it	is	good,	it	is	beautiful.	These	are	the
three	qualities.
Homage	 to	 the	 perfection	 of	 wisdom…	 Truth…	 That’s	 what	 truth	 is:	 the
perfection	of	wisdom,	the	lovely,	the	beautiful,	the	holy,	the	good.
Why	is	it	called	holy?	–	because	buddhas	are	born	out	of	it.	It	is	the	womb
of	 the	 buddhas.	 You	 become	 a	 buddha	 the	 moment	 you	 partake	 of	 this
perfection	of	wisdom.	You	become	a	buddha	when	the	dewdrop	disappears	into
the	 ocean,	 loses	 separation,	 is	 no	 longer	 struggling	 against	 the	 whole,	 is
surrendered,	is	with	the	whole,	no	longer	against	it.	Hence	my	insistence	to	be
with	nature,	never	against	it.	Never	try	to	overcome	it,	never	try	to	conquer	it,
never	try	to	defeat	it.	If	you	try	to	defeat	it,	you	are	doomed	to	failure	because
the	part	cannot	defeat	 the	whole	–	and	 that’s	what	everybody	 is	 trying	 to	do.
Hence	 there	 is	 so	much	 frustration,	because	everybody	seems	 to	be	a	 failure.
Everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 conquer	 the	whole,	 trying	 to	push	 the	 river.	Naturally
you	 become	 tired	 one	 day,	 exhausted	 –	 you	 have	 a	 very	 limited	 source	 of
energy;	the	river	is	vast.	One	day	it	takes	you,	but	you	give	in,	in	frustration.
If	you	can	give	in	joyfully,	it	becomes	surrender.	Then	it	is	no	longer	defeat,
it	 is	 a	 victory.	 You	 win	 only	 with	 existence,	 never	 against	 existence.	 And
remember,	existence	is	not	trying	to	defeat	you.	Your	defeat	is	self-generated.
You	are	defeated	because	you	 fight.	 If	you	want	 to	be	defeated,	 fight;	 if	you
want	 to	 win,	 surrender.	 This	 is	 the	 paradox:	 those	 who	 are	 ready	 to	 give	 in
become	the	winners.	The	losers	are	the	only	winners	in	this	game.	Try	to	win
and	your	defeat	 is	absolutely	certain	–	 it	 is	only	a	question	of	 time,	of	when,
but	it	is	certain	it	is	going	to	happen.
It	is	holy	because	you	are	one	with	the	whole.	You	throb	with	it,	you	dance
with	it,	you	sing	with	it.	You	are	like	a	leaf	in	the	wind:	the	leaf	simply	dances
with	 the	 wind,	 it	 has	 no	 will	 of	 its	 own.	 This	 will-lessness	 is	 what	 I	 call
sannyas,	what	the	sutra	calls	holy.
The	Sanskrit	word	for	holy	is	bhagavati.	That	is	even	more	important	to	be
understood	than	the	word	holy	because	the	word	holy	may	carry	some	Christian
connotation	to	it.	Bhagavati	 is	feminine	for	bhagavan.	First,	 the	sutra	did	not
use	the	word	bhagavan,	it	used	bhagavati,	the	feminine	–	because	the	source	of
all	is	feminine,	not	masculine.	It	is	yin,	not	yang,	it	is	a	mother,	not	a	father.
The	Christian	concept	of	God	as	the	father	is	not	so	beautiful.	It	is	nothing
but	male	ego.	The	male	ego	cannot	think	that	God	can	be	a	“she”;	the	male	ego
wants	God	to	be	a	“he.”	And	you	see	the	whole	Christian	trinity:	all	three	are
men,	woman	is	not	included	there	–	God	the	father,	and	Christ	the	son,	and	the
Holy	Ghost.	It	is	an	all-male	club.	And	remember	well	that	the	feminine	is	far
more	fundamental	in	life	than	the	man,	because	only	the	woman	has	a	womb;
only	 the	 woman	 can	 give	 birth	 to	 life,	 to	 new	 life.	 It	 comes	 through	 the
feminine.
Why	does	it	come	through	the	feminine?	It	 is	not	 just	accidental.	 It	comes
through	the	feminine	because	only	the	feminine	can	allow	it	to	come	–	because
the	 feminine	 is	 receptive.	 The	 masculine	 is	 aggressive;	 the	 feminine	 can
receive,	absorb,	can	become	a	passage.
The	 Sanskrit	 sutra	 says	 bhagavati,	 not	 bhagavan.	 It	 is	 of	 immense
importance.	 That	 perfect	 wisdom	 out	 of	 which	 all	 the	 buddhas	 come	 is	 a
feminine	element,	a	mother.	The	womb	has	to	be	a	mother.	Once	you	think	of
God	as	the	father,	you	don’t	seem	to	understand	what	you	are	doing.	The	father
is	an	unnatural	 institution.	The	father	does	not	exist	 in	nature.	The	father	has
existed	 only	 for	 a	 few	 thousand	 years;	 it	 is	 a	 human	 institution.	 The	mother
exists	everywhere,	the	mother	is	natural.
The	 father	 came	 into	 the	world	 because	 of	 private	 property.	 The	 father	 is
part	of	economics,	not	of	nature.	And	once	private	property	disappears	–	 if	 it
ever	 disappears	 –	 the	 father	 will	 disappear.	 The	 mother	 will	 remain	 there
always	and	always.	We	cannot	conceive	of	a	world	without	the	mother,	we	can
conceive	 of	 a	 world	 without	 the	 father	 very	 easily.	 And	 the	 very	 idea	 is
aggressive.	 Have	 you	 not	 seen?	 Only	 Germans	 call	 their	 country	 the
“fatherland,”	 every	 other	 country	 calls	 it	 the	 “motherland.”	 These	 are
dangerous	 people!	 “Motherland”	 is	 okay.	 By	 calling	 your	 country	 the
“fatherland”	you	are	starting	something	dangerous,	you	are	putting	something
dangerous	on	foot.	Sooner	or	later	the	aggression	will	come,	the	war	will	come.
The	seed	is	there.
All	the	religions	that	have	thought	of	God	as	the	father	have	been	aggressive
religions.	Christianity	is	aggressive,	so	is	Islam.	And	you	know	perfectly	well
that	 the	 Jewish	 God	 is	 a	 very	 angry	 and	 arrogant	 God.	 The	 Jewish	 God
declares:	“If	you	are	not	for	me,	then	you	are	against	me	and	I	will	destroy	you.
And	I	am	a	very	jealous	God;	only	worship	me!”	The	people	who	have	thought
of	God	as	the	mother	have	been	nonviolent	people.
Buddhists	have	never	fought	a	war	in	the	name	of	religion.	They	have	never
tried	to	convert	a	single	human	being	by	any	force,	by	coercion	of	whatsoever
sort.	Mohammedans	have	tried	to	convert	people	with	the	sword,	against	their
will,	against	their	conscience,	against	their	consciousness.	Christians	have	tried
to	manipulate	people	 to	become	Christians	 in	 all	 kinds	of	ways	–	 sometimes
through	 the	 sword,	 sometimes	 through	 bread,	 sometimes	 through	 other
persuasions.	 Buddhism	 is	 the	 only	 religion	 that	 has	 not	 converted	 a	 single
human	 being	 against	 hisconscience.	Only	Buddhism	 is	 a	 nonviolent	 religion,
because	the	concept	of	the	ultimate	reality	is	feminine.
Homage	to	the	perfection	of	wisdom,	the	lovely,	the	holy!	Remember,	truth	is
beautiful.	Truth	is	beauty	because	truth	is	a	benediction.	Truth	cannot	be	ugly,
and	the	ugly	cannot	be	true;	the	ugly	is	illusory.
When	you	see	an	ugly	person,	don’t	be	deceived	by	his	ugliness;	 search	a
little	 deeper	 and	 you	 will	 find	 a	 beautiful	 person	 hidden	 there.	 Don’t	 be
deceived	by	ugliness.	Ugliness	is	in	your	interpretation.	Life	is	beautiful,	truth
is	beautiful,	existence	is	beautiful	–	it	knows	no	ugliness.
It	 is	 lovely,	 it	 is	 feminine,	and	 it	 is	holy.	But	 remember,	what	 is	meant	by
holy	is	not	what	is	ordinarily	meant	–	as	if	it	is	otherworldly,	as	if	it	is	sacred
against	 the	mundane	and	 the	profane,	no.	All	 is	holy.	There	 is	nothing	which
can	be	 called	mundane	or	 profane.	All	 is	 sacred	because	 all	 is	 suffused	with
one.
There	 are	 buddhas	 and	 buddhas!	 –	 buddha-trees	 and	 buddha-dogs	 and
buddha-birds	and	buddha-men	and	buddha-women	–	but	 all	 are	buddhas.	All
are	on	the	way.	Man	is	not	God	in	ruins,	man	is	God	in	the	making,	on	the	way.
The	second	sutra:
Avalokita,	the	holy	lord	and	bodhisattva,	was	moving	in	the	deep	course	of	the	wisdom
which	has	gone	beyond.
He	looked	down	from	on	high,	he	beheld	but	five	heaps,	and	he	saw	that	in	their	own	being
they	were	empty.
Avalokita	 is	 a	 name	 of	 Buddha.	 Literally	 it	 means	 one	 who	 looks	 from
above	–	avalokita	–	one	who	looks	from	above,	one	who	stands	at	the	seventh
center,	 sahasrar,	 the	 transcendental,	 and	 looks	 from	 there.	 Naturally,
whatsoever	you	see	is	contaminated	by	your	standpoint,	is	contaminated	by	the
space	you	are	in.
If	a	man	who	lives	at	the	first	rung	–	the	physical	body	–	looks	at	anything,
he	 looks	 from	that	 standpoint.	A	man	who	 lives	at	 the	physical	only	 looks	at
your	body	when	he	looks	at	you,	he	cannot	look	at	more	than	that,	he	cannot
see	 more	 than	 that.	 Your	 vision	 of	 things	 depends	 on	 from	 where	 you	 are
looking.
A	man	who	is	sexually	disturbed,	sexually	involved	in	fantasies,	only	looks
from	that	standpoint.	A	man	who	is	hungry	looks	from	that	standpoint.	Watch
in	 your	 own	 self.	You	 look	 at	 things,	 and	 each	 time	 you	 look	 at	 things	 they
appear	 different	 because	 you	 are	 different.	 In	 the	morning	 the	world	 looks	 a
little	more	beautiful	than	in	the	evening.	In	the	morning	you	are	fresh,	and	in
the	morning	 you	 have	 come	 from	 a	 depth	 of	 great	 sleep,	 the	 deep	 sleep,	 the
dreamless	 sleep.	 You	 have	 tasted	 something	 of	 the	 transcendental,	 although
unconsciously.	So	in	the	morning	everything	looks	beautiful.	People	are	more
compassionate,	more	loving;	people	are	purer	in	the	morning,	people	are	more
innocent	 in	 the	morning.	By	 the	 time	evening	arrives	 those	 same	people	will
become	 more	 corrupted,	 more	 cunning,	 clever,	 manipulating,	 ugly,	 violent,
deceiving.	They	are	the	same	people,	but	in	the	morning	they	were	very	close
to	 the	 transcendental.	By	 the	 evening	 they	have	 lived	 in	 the	mundane,	 in	 the
worldly,	in	the	physical	too	much,	and	they	have	become	focused	there.
The	man	of	perfection	is	one	who	can	move	through	all	these	seven	chakras
easily	–	that	is	the	man	of	freedom	–	who	is	not	fixed	at	any	point,	who	is	like	a
dial:	you	can	adjust	it	to	any	vision.	That	is	what	is	called	a	mukta,one	who	is
really	 free.	He	 can	move	 in	 all	 the	dimensions	 and	yet	 remain	untouched	by
them.	His	purity	is	never	lost,	his	purity	remains	of	the	transcendental.
Buddha	can	come	and	touch	your	body	and	heal	your	body.	He	can	become
a	body,	but	that	is	his	freedom.	He	can	become	a	mind	and	he	can	talk	to	you
and	 explain	 things	 to	 you,	 but	 he	 is	 never	 the	 mind.	 He	 comes	 and	 stands
behind	the	mind,	uses	it,	just	as	you	drive	your	car	–	you	never	become	the	car.
He	 uses	 all	 these	 rungs,	 he	 is	 the	 whole	 ladder.	 But	 his	 ultimate	 standpoint
remains	the	transcendental.	That	is	his	nature.
Avalokita	means	one	who	looks	from	the	beyond	at	the	world.
Avalokita,	the	holy	lord	and	bodhisattva,	was	moving	in	the	deep	course	of
the	wisdom	which	has	gone	beyond.	The	sutra	says	this	state	of	beyondness	is
not	a	static	thing.	It	is	a	movement,	it	is	a	process,	riverlike.	It	is	not	a	noun,	it
is	 a	 verb.	 It	 goes	 on	 unfolding.	 That’s	why	Hindus	 call	 it	 the	 one-thousand-
petaled	lotus:	“one	thousand”	simply	means	infinite,	it	is	symbolic	of	infinity.
Petals	upon	petals,	petals	upon	petals	go	on	opening,	 to	no	end.	The	 journey
begins	but	never	ends.	It	is	eternal	pilgrimage.
Avalokita,	the	holy	lord	and	bodhisattva,	was	moving	in	the	deep	course	of
the	wisdom	which	has	gone	beyond.	He	was	flowing	like	a	river	into	the	world
of	 the	beyond.	He	 is	called	 the	holy	 lord	and	bodhisattva.	Again	 the	Sanskrit
word	has	to	be	remembered.	The	Sanskrit	word	is	iswara,	which	is	translated
as	 “holy	 lord.”	 Iswara	means	 one	who	 has	 become	 absolutely	 rich	 from	 his
own	riches,	whose	riches	are	of	his	own	nature;	nobody	can	 take	 them	away,
nobody	can	steal	them,	they	cannot	be	lost.	All	the	riches	that	you	have	can	be
lost,	 can	 be	 stolen,	 will	 be	 lost	 –	 one	 day	 death	 will	 come	 and	 will	 take
everything	 away.	When	 somebody	has	 come	 to	 the	 inner	diamond	 that	 is	 his
own	 being,	 death	 cannot	 take	 it	 away.	Death	 is	 irrelevant	 to	 it.	 It	 cannot	 be
stolen,	it	cannot	be	lost.	Then	one	has	become	iswara,	then	one	has	become	a
holy	lord.	Then	one	has	become	bhagavan.
The	word	bhagavan	simply	means	“the	blessed	one.”	Then	one	has	become
the	blessed	one.	Now	his	blessing	is	eternally	his;	it	depends	on	nothing,	it	 is
independent.	 It	 is	 not	 caused	 by	 anything	 so	 it	 cannot	 be	 taken	 away.	 It	 is
uncaused,	it	is	one’s	intrinsic	nature.
And	 he	 is	 called	 bodhisattva.	 Bodhisattva	 is	 a	 very	 beautiful	 concept	 in
Buddhism.	It	means	one	who	has	become	a	buddha,	but	is	still	holding	himself
in	the	world	of	time	and	space	–	to	help	others.	Bodhisattva	means	“essentially
a	 buddha,”	 is	 just	 ready	 to	 drop	 and	 disappear,	 is	 ready	 to	 go	 into	 nirvana.
Nothing	remains	to	be	solved,	all	his	problems	are	solved.	There	is	no	need	for
him	to	be	here,	but	he	is	still	here.	There	is	nothing	else	to	be	learned	here,	but
he	is	still	here.	And	he	is	keeping	himself	in	body-form,	in	mind-form	–	he	is
keeping	 the	whole	 ladder.	He	 has	 gone	 beyond,	 but	 he	 is	 keeping	 the	whole
ladder	–	to	help,	out	of	compassion.
	
A	story	is	told	that	Buddha	reached	the	doors	of	the	ultimate,	nirvana.	The
doors	 were	 opened,	 the	 angels	 were	 dancing	 and	 singing	 to	 receive	 him	 –
because	it	rarely	happens	that	a	human	being	becomes	a	buddha,	in	millions	of
years.	The	doors	open,	and	that	day	is	naturally	a	great	day	of	celebration.	All
the	 ancient	buddhas	had	gathered,	 and	 there	was	great	 rejoicing,	 and	 flowers
were	showering,	and	music	was	played,	and	everything	was	decorated	–	it	was
a	day	of	celebration.
But	 Buddha	 did	 not	 enter	 the	 door.	 The	 ancient	 buddhas,	 all	 with	 folded
hands,	asked	him,	requested	him	to	come	in:	“Why	are	you	standing	outside?”
And	Buddha	 is	 reported	 to	 have	 said,	 “Unless	 all	 others	who	 are	 coming
behind	me	enter,	 I	 am	not	going	 to	enter.	 I	will	keep	myself	outside	because
once	I	come	in,	then	I	disappear.	Then	I	will	not	be	of	any	help	to	these	people.
I	see	millions	of	people	stumbling	and	groping	in	the	dark.	I	have	myself	been
groping	the	same	way	for	millions	of	lives.	I	would	like	to	give	them	my	hand.
Please	 close	 the	 door.	When	 everybody	 has	 come,	 I	myself	will	 knock,	 then
you	can	receive	me.”
	
A	beautiful	story.	This	is	called	the	state	of	bodhisattva:	one	who	is	ready	to
disappear	but	still	is	holding	–	in	body,	in	mind,	in	the	world,	in	time	and	space
–	to	help	others.
Buddha	says:	“Meditation	is	enough	to	solve	your	problems,	but	something
is	missing	in	it	–	compassion.”	If	compassion	is	also	there,	then	you	can	help
others	 solve	 their	 problems.	 He	 says:	 “Meditation	 is	 pure	 gold;	 it	 has	 a
perfection	of	its	own.	But	if	there	is	compassion	then	the	gold	has	a	fragrance
too	 –	 then	 a	 higher	 perfection,	 then	 a	 new	 kind	 of	 perfection,	 gold	 with
fragrance.”	Gold	is	enough	unto	itself	–	very	valuable	–	but	with	compassion,
meditation	has	a	fragrance.
Compassion	keeps	a	buddha	remaining	a	bodhisattva,	just	on	the	borderline.
Yes,	for	a	few	days,	a	few	years,	one	can	hold,	but	not	for	long	–	because	by
and	by	things	start	disappearing	on	their	own.	When	you	are	not	attached	with
the	 body,	 you	become	dislocated	 from	 there.	You	 can	 come	 sometimes,	with
effort.	You	can	use	 the	body,	with	effort,	but	you	are	no	 longer	 settled	 there.
When	you	are	no	longer	in	the	mind	you	can	use	it	sometimes,	but	it	no	longer
functions	as	well	as	it	used	to	function	before.	You	are	no	longer	flowing	in	it.
When	you	are	not	using	it,	it	is	lying	there:	it	is	a	mechanism,	it	starts	gathering
rust.
When	a	man	has	reached	the	seventh,	for	a	few	days,	for	a	few	years,	he	can
use	 the	 six	 rungs.	 He	 can	 go	 back	 and	 use	 them,	 but	 by	 and	 by	 they	 start
breaking.	By	and	by,	they	start	dying.	A	bodhisattva	can	be	here	for	only	one
life,	at	the	most.	Then	he	has	to	disappear	because	the	mechanism	disappears.
But	 all	 those	who	 have	 attained	 have	 tried,	 as	 far	 as	 they	 can,	 to	 use	 the
bodymind	 to	 help	 those	 who	 are	 in	 body	 and	 mind,	 to	 help	 those	 who	 can
understand	only	the	language	of	the	body	and	the	mind,	to	help	the	disciples.
Avalokita,	the	holy	lord	and	bodhisattva,	was	moving	in	the	deep	course	of
the	wisdom	which	has	gone	beyond.	He	looked	down	from	on	high,	he	beheld
but	five	heaps,	and	he	saw	that	in	their	own	being	they	were	empty.	When	you
look	 from	 that	 point…	 For	 example,	 I	 was	 just	 telling	 you	 that	 I	 salute	 the
buddha	in	you.	That	is	one	vision	from	the	beyond:	that	I	see	you	as	potential
buddhas.	And	another	vision	is	just	that	I	see	you	as	empty	shells.
What	you	think	you	are	is	nothing	but	an	empty	shell.	Somebody	thinks	he
is	 a	 man;	 that	 is	 an	 empty	 idea.	 Consciousness	 is	 neither	 male	 nor	 female.
Somebody	thinks	he	has	a	very	beautiful	body,	he	is	beautiful,	strong,	this	and
that	–	that	is	an	empty	idea,	just	ego	deceiving	you.	Somebody	thinks	he	knows
much	 –	 that	 is	 just	meaningless.	 His	mechanism	 has	 accumulated	memories
and	he	is	deceived	by	the	memories.	These	are	all	empty	things.
So	 when	 seeing	 from	 the	 transcendental,	 on	 the	 one	 side	 I	 see	 you	 as
budding	buddhas,	on	another	side	I	see	you	just	as	empty	shells.
Buddha	has	 said	 that	man	 consists	 of	 five	 elements,	 five	 skandhas,	 which
are	all	empty.	And	because	of	the	combination	of	the	five,	a	by-product	arises
called	 the	 ego,	 the	 self.	 It	 is	 just	 like	 a	 clock	 functioning:	 it	 goes	on	 ticking.
You	can	listen	and	the	tick	is	there;	you	can	open	the	clock,	you	can	separate
all	the	parts	to	find	where	the	tick	is	coming	from.	Where	is	the	tick?	You	will
not	find	it	anywhere.	The	tick	is	a	by-product.	It	is	just	a	combination	of	a	few
things.	A	few	things	functioning	together	were	creating	a	tick.
That’s	what	your	“I”	is	–	five	elements	functioning	together	creating	the	tick
called	 “I.”	 But	 it	 is	 empty,	 it	 has	 nothing	 in	 it.	 If	 you	 go	 and	 search	 for
something	substantial	in	it,	you	will	not	find	anything.
This	 is	one	of	 the	Buddha’s	deepest	 intuitions,	 insights:	 that	 life	 is	 empty,
that	 life	 as	 we	 know	 it	 is	 empty.	 And	 life	 is	 full	 too,	 but	 we	 don’t	 know
anything	about	it.	From	this	emptiness	you	have	to	move	toward	a	fullness,	but
that	fullness	is	inconceivable	right	now	–	because	that	fullness	from	this	state
will	look	only	empty.	From	that	state	your	fullness	looks	empty	–	a	king	looks
like	 a	 beggar;	 a	 man	 of	 knowledge,	 a	 knowledgeable	 man,	 looks	 stupid,
ignorant.
A	small	story:
	
A	certain	holy	man	accepted	a	pupil	and	said	 to	him,	“It	would	be	a	good
thing	if	you	tried	to	write	down	all	you	understand	about	the	religious	life	and
what	has	brought	you	to	it.”
The	pupil	went	away	and	began	to	write.	A	year	later	he	came	back	to	the
master	 and	 said,	 “I	have	worked	very	hard	on	 this,	 and	 though	 it	 is	 far	 from
complete,	these	are	the	main	reasons	for	my	struggle.”
The	master	 read	 the	work,	which	was	many	 thousands	of	words,	 and	 then
said	 to	 the	young	man,	 “It	 is	 admirably	 reasoned	 and	 clearly	 stated,	 but	 it	 is
somewhat	 long.	Try	 to	shorten	 it	a	 little.”	So	 the	novice	went	away	and	after
five	years	he	came	back	with	a	mere	hundred	pages.
The	master	 smiled,	 and	 after	 he	 had	 read	 it	 he	 said,	 “Now	 you	 are	 truly
approaching	 the	 heart	 of	 the	matter.	Your	 thoughts	 have	 clarity	 and	 strength.
But	it	is	still	a	little	long;	try	to	condense	it,	my	son.”
The	novice	went	away	sadly,	for	he	had	labored	hard	to	reach	the	essence.
But	 after	 ten	years	 he	 came	back,	 and	bowing	 low	before	 the	master	 offered
him	just	five	pages	and	said,	“This	is	the	kernel	of	my	faith,	the	core	of	my	life,
and	I	ask	your	blessings	for	having	brought	me	to	it.”
The	master	read	it	slowly	and	carefully:	“It	is	truly	marvelous,”	he	said,	“in
its	 simplicity	 and	 beauty,	 but	 it	 is	 not	 yet	 perfect.	 Try	 to	 reach	 a	 final
clarification.”
And	when	the	master	had	reached	the	time	appointed	and	was	preparing	for
his	end,	his	pupil	returned	to	him	again,	and	kneeling	before	him	to	receive	his
blessings	handed	him	a	single	sheet	of	paper	on	which	was	written	nothing.
Then	the	master	placed	his	hands	on	the	head	of	his	friend	and	said,	“Now…
Now	you	have	understood.”
	
From	that	transcendental	vision,	what	you	have	is	empty.	From	your	vision,
your	neurotic	vision,	what	I	have	is	empty.
Buddha	looks	empty	–	just	pure	emptiness	–	to	you.	Because	of	your	ideas,
because	of	your	clinging,	because	of	your	possessiveness	about	things,	Buddha
looks	empty.	Buddha	 is	 full:	you	are	empty.	And	his	vision	 is	 absolute;	your
vision	is	very	relative.
The	sutra	says:
Avolokita,	the	holy	lord	and	bodhisattva,	was	moving	in	the	deep	course	of	the	wisdom
which	has	gone	beyond.
He	looked	down	from	on	high,	he	beheld	but	five	heaps,	and	he	saw	that	in	their	own	being
they	were	empty.
Emptiness	is	the	key	to	Buddhism	–	shunyata.	Meditate	over	these	sutras	–
meditate	with	love,	with	sympathy,	not	with	logic	and	reasoning.	If	you	go	to
these	 sutras	with	 logic	 and	 reasoning,	 you	will	 kill	 their	 spirit.	Don’t	 dissect
them.	Try	 to	understand	 them	as	 they	are,	 and	don’t	bring	your	mind	–	your
mind	will	be	an	interference.
If	you	can	 look	at	 these	sutras	without	your	mind,	great	clarity	 is	going	 to
happen	to	you.
	
Chapter	8:	Patanjali	and	the	Path	of	Yoga
	
Patanjali’s	skill	 in	expressing	 the	 inexpressible	 is	superb.	Nobody	has	ever
been	able	to	surpass	him.	He	has	mapped	the	inner	world	of	consciousness	as
accurately	as	it	is	possible;	he	has	almost	done	an	impossible	job.
I	have	heard	a	story	about	Ramakrishna…
	
One	day	he	said	to	his	disciples,	“I	will	 tell	you	everything	today	and	will
not	keep	anything	secret.”
He	described	clearly	the	centers	and	the	corresponding	experiences	up	to	the
heart	and	 throat,	and	 then	pointing	 to	 the	spot	between	the	eyebrows	he	said,
“The	 supreme	 self	 is	 directly	 known	 and	 the	 individual	 experiences	 samadhi
when	 the	mind	comes	here.	There	 remains	 then	but	 a	 thin	 transparent	 screen
separating	 the	 supreme	 self	 and	 the	 individual	 self.	 The	 sadhak	 then
experiences…”
Saying	 this,	 the	moment	 he	 started	 to	 describe	 in	 detail	 the	 realization	 of
supreme	self,	he	was	plunged	in	samadhi	and	became	unconscious.	When	the
samadhi	came	to	an	end	and	he	came	back,	he	tried	again	to	describe	it	and	was
again	in	samadhi;	again	he	became	unconscious.
After	repeated	attempts,	Ramakrishna	broke	into	tears	and	told	his	disciples
that	it	was	impossible	to	speak	about	it.
	
But	 Ramakrishna	 has	 tried,	 has	 tried	 in	 many	 ways,	 from	 different
directions,	 and	 this	 always	 happened,	 his	 whole	 life.	 Whenever	 he	 comes
beyond	 the	 third-eye	 center	 and	 is	 coming	 nearer	 sahasrar,	 he	 is	 so	 deeply
caught	hold	of	by	 something	 inner	 that	 the	very	 remembrance	of	 it,	 the	very
effort	to	describe	it,	and	he	is	gone.	For	hours	he	will	remain	unconscious.	It’s
natural	because	the	bliss	of	sahasrar	is	such,	one	is	almost	overpowered	by	it.
The	bliss	 is	 so	oceanic	 that	one	 is	possessed	by	 it	 and	 taken	over.	One	 is	no
longer	oneself,	once	you	transcend	the	third	eye.
Ramakrishna	 tried	and	 failed;	 could	not	describe	 it.	Many	others	have	not
even	tried.	Lao	Tzu	for	his	whole	life	resisted	saying	anything	about	the	world
of	Tao	because	of	this.	Nothing	can	be	said	about	it,	and	the	moment	you	try	to
say	 it,	 you	 are	 plunged	 into	 an	 inner	 whirlwind,	 whirlpool.	 You	 are	 lost,
drowned.	You	are	bathed	in	such	beauty	and	beautitude	that	you	cannot	utter	a
single	word.
But	 Patanjali	 has	 done	 the	 impossible.	 He	 has	 described	 as	 exactly	 as
possible	each	step,	each	integration,	each	chakra	–	its	functioning,	and	how	to
transcend	 it,	 up	 to	 sahasrar.	 And	 he	 has	 even	 indicated	 beyond.	 On	 each
chakra,	on	each	wheel	of	energy,	a	certain	integration	happens.
Let	me	tell	you:	at	the	sex	center,	the	first	center	–	the	most	primitive	but	the
most	natural,	the	one	that	is	available	to	all	–	the	integration	happens	between
the	outer	and	the	inner.	Of	course	it	is	momentary.	A	woman	meeting	a	man	or
a	man	meeting	a	woman	come	for	a	single	moment,	a	split	moment,	where	the
outer	and	inner	meet	and	mingle	and	merge	into	each	other.	That’s	the	beauty
of	 sex,	 the	orgasm,	 that	 two	energies,	 the	 complementary	 energies,	meet	 and
become	 one	whole.	 But	 it	 is	 going	 to	 be	momentary	 because	 the	meeting	 is
through	the	most	gross	element,	 the	body.	The	body	can	touch	surfaces	but	 it
cannot	 really	 enter	 the	 other.	 It	 is	 like	 ice	 cubes.	 If	 you	 put	 two	 ice	 cubes
together,	 they	 can	 touch	 each	other,	 but	 if	 they	melt	 and	become	water,	 then
they	meet	and	mingle	with	each	other.	Then	they	go	to	the	very	center.	And	if
the	water	evaporates,	then	the	meeting	becomes	very,	very	deep.	Then	there	is
no	I,	no	thou,	no	inner,	no	outer.
The	first	center,	 the	sex	center,	gives	you	a	certain	 integration.	That’s	why
there	 is	 so	much	hankering	 for	 sex.	 It	 is	 natural.	 It	 is	 in	 itself	 beneficial	 and
good.	But	 if	 you	 stop	 there,	 you	 have	 stopped	 in	 the	 porch	 of	 a	 palace.	The
porch	 is	good,	 it	 leads	you	 into	 the	palace,	but	 it	 is	not	a	place	 to	make	your
abode,	it	is	not	a	place	to	stop	forever	–	and	the	bliss	that	is	waiting	for	you	on
higher	integrations	of	other	centers	will	be	missed.	In	comparison	to	that	bliss
and	 happiness	 and	 joy,	 the	 beauty	 of	 sex	 is	 nothing,	 the	 pleasure	 of	 sex	 is
nothing.	It	simply	gives	you	a	momentary	glimpse.
The	second	chakra	is	the	hara.	At	the	hara,	life	and	death	meet.	If	you	reach
to	the	second	center,	you	reach	to	a	higher	orgasm	of	integration;	life	meeting
death,	sun	meeting	moon.	And	the	meeting	is	inner	now,	so	the	meeting	can	be
more	permanent,	more	stable,	because	you	are	not	dependent	on	anybody	else.
Now	you	are	meeting	your	own	inner	woman	or	your	own	inner	man.
The	third	center	is	the	navel.	There	the	positive	and	the	negative	meet	–	the
positive	 electricity	 and	 the	 negative	 electricity.	 Their	meeting	 is	 even	 higher
than	 life	 and	 death	 because	 the	 electric	 energy,	 the	 prana,	 the	 bioplasma	 or
bioenergy,	 is	 deeper	 than	 life	 and	 death.	 It	 exists	 before	 life,	 it	 exists	 after
death.	Life	and	death	exist	because	of	bioenergy.	This	meeting	of	bioenergy	at
the	navel,	nabhi,	gives	you	even	a	higher	experience	of	being	one:	integrated,	a
unity.
Then	is	the	heart:	at	the	heart	center,	the	lower	and	the	higher	meet.	At	the
heart	center:	the	prakriti	and	purusha,	the	sexual	and	the	spiritual,	the	worldly
and	the	other-worldly	–	or	you	can	call	it	the	meeting	of	heaven	and	earth.	It	is
still	higher	because	for	the	first	time	something	of	the	beyond	dawns	–	you	can
see	 the	 sun	 rising	 at	 the	 horizon.	 You	 are	 still	 rooted	 in	 the	 earth,	 but	 your
branches	are	spreading	into	the	sky.	You	have	become	a	meeting.	That’s	why
the	 heart	 center	 gives	 the	 highest	 and	 the	most	 refined	 experience	 ordinarily
available	 –	 the	 experience	 of	 love.	 The	 experience	 of	 love	 is	 the	meeting	 of
earth	and	heaven;	so	love	is	in	a	way	earthly,	and	in	another	way	heavenly.
If	 Jesus	 defined	 God	 as	 love,	 this	 is	 the	 reason	 because	 in	 human
consciousness,	love	seems	to	be	the	higher	glimpse.
Ordinarily	 people	 never	 go	 beyond	 the	 heart	 center.	 Even	 to	 reach	 to	 the
heart	center	seems	to	be	difficult,	almost	impossible.	People	remain	at	the	sex
center.	If	they	are	trained	deeply	in	yoga,	karate,	aikido,	tai	chi,	then	they	reach
to	 the	 second	 center,	 the	 hara.	 If	 they	 are	 trained	 in	 a	 deep	 mechanism	 of
breathing,	prana,	then	they	reach	the	navel	center.	And	if	they	are	trained	how
to	 look	 beyond	 earth	 and	 how	 to	 see	 beyond	 the	 body	 and	 how	 to	 look	 so
deeply	and	so	sensitively	that	you	are	no	longer	confined	to	the	gross,	and	the
subtle	can	penetrate	its	first	rays	into	you	–	only	then,	the	heart.
All	paths	of	devotion	–	bhakti	yoga	–	work	on	the	heart	center.	Tantra	starts
from	the	sex	center,	Tao	starts	from	the	hara	center.	Yoga	starts	from	the	navel
center.	Bhakti	yoga,	paths	of	devotion	and	love,	Sufis	and	others,	start	from	the
heart	center.
Higher	 than	 the	 heart	 is	 the	 throat	 center.	 Again	 there	 happens	 another
integration,	 even	 more	 superior,	 more	 subtle.	 This	 center	 is	 the	 center	 of
receiving	and	giving.	When	the	child	is	born	he	receives	from	the	throat	center.
First,	life	enters	him	from	the	throat	center	–	he	sucks	air,	breathes;	and	then	he
sucks	milk	from	his	mother.	The	child	functions	from	the	throat	center,	but	it	is
half	functioning	and	soon	he	forgets	about	it.	He	just	receives,	he	cannot	give
yet;	 his	 love	 is	 passive.	 And	 if	 you	 are	 asking	 for	 love,	 then	 you	 remain
juvenile,	you	remain	childish.	Unless	you	mature	–	so	that	you	can	give	love	–
you	have	not	become	a	grown-up.	Everybody	asks	for	love,	demands	love,	and
almost	nobody	gives.	That’s	the	misery	all	over	the	world.	And	everybody	who
demands	thinks	that	he	is	giving,	believes	that	he	is	giving.
I	have	looked	into	thousands	of	people	–	all	hungry	for	love,	thirsty	for	love,
but	nobody	in	any	way	trying	to	give.	And	they	all	believe	that	they	are	giving
but	not	receiving.	Once	you	give	you	naturally	receive.	It	has	never	happened
otherwise.	 The	moment	 you	 give,	 love	 rushes	 into	 you.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do
with	people;	it	has	something	to	do	with	the	cosmic	energy	of	existence.
The	throat	center	is	the	meeting	of	receiving	and	giving.	You	receive	from	it
and	you	give	 from	 it.	That	 is	 the	meaning	of	Christ’s	 saying	 that	 unless	 you
become	 a	 child	 again….	 If	 you	 translate	 it	 into	 the	 yoga	 terminology	 it	will
mean:	unless	you	come	 to	 the	 throat	center	again…	The	child	 forgets	by	and
by.
If	you	 look	 into	Freudian	psychology,	you	will	have	a	parallel.	Freud	says
the	first	stage	of	the	child	is	oral,	the	second	stage	is	anal,	and	the	third	stage	is
genital.	The	whole	of	Freudian	psychology	ends	with	the	third.	Of	course	it	is	a
very	poor	psychology,	very	rudimentary,	fragmentary,	and	concerned	with	the
very	lower	functioning	of	human	beings.	Oral	–	yes,	 the	child	uses	 the	 throat
center,	 just	 to	 receive.	And	once	he	has	started	receiving,	his	being	moves	 to
the	anal.
Have	you	seen	 that	a	 few	people	cling	 to	 the	oral,	even	up	 to	 their	death?
These	are	the	people	you	will	find	smoking;	these	are	oral	people.	They	still	go
on…	The	smoke,	the	cigarette,	the	cigar,	gives	them	a	feeling	as	if	something
hot	 like	 mother’s	 milk	 is	 passing	 through	 the	 throat	 center;	 they	 remain
confined	to	the	oral	and	they	cannot	give.	If	a	person	is	a	chain-smoker,	heavy
smoker,	almost	always	he	is	not	a	giver	of	love.	He	demands,	but	he	will	not
give.
People	who	are	smoking	too	much	are	always	interested	in	women’s	breasts
–	bound	to	be	because	a	cigarette	is	a	substitute	for	the	nipple.	I	am	not	saying
that	people	who	are	not	smokers	are	not	interested	in	women’s	breasts.	Those
who	 smoke	 are	 interested;	 those	who	 don’t	 smoke	 are	 also	 interested	 –	 they
may	 be	 chewing	 pan	 or	 gum	 or	 something	 else,	 or	 they	 may	 be	 simply
interested	 in	 pornography,	 or	 they	 may	 be	 just	 obsessed	 by	 the	 breast
continuously.	 In	 their	mind,	 in	 their	 dream,	 in	 their	 imagination,	 fantasy,	 the
breast	 –	 breasts	 and	 breasts	 go	 on	 floating	 all	 around	 them.	 These	 are	 oral
people,	stuck.
When	Jesus	says	you	have	to	be	a	child	again,	he	means	you	have	to	come
back	to	the	throat	center,	but	with	a	new	energy	to	give.	All	creative	people	are
givers.	They	may	sing	a	song	for	you	or	dance	a	dance	or	write	a	poem	or	paint
a	picture	or	 tell	you	a	story.	For	all	 these,	 the	throat	center	 is	again	used	as	a
center	to	give.	The	meeting	of	receiving	and	giving	happens	at	the	throat.	The
capacity	to	receive	and	to	give	is	one	of	the	greatest	integrations.
There	 are	 people	 who	 are	 only	 capable	 of	 receiving.	 They	 will	 remain
miserable	 because	 you	 never	 become	 rich	 by	 receiving.	You	 become	 rich	 by
giving.	In	fact,	you	possess	only	that	which	you	can	give.	If	you	cannot	give	it,
you	simply	believe	that	you	possess.	You	don’t	possess	it;	you	are	not	a	master.
If	you	cannot	give	your	money,	then	you	are	not	the	master	of	it.	Then	money
is	 the	master.	 If	 you	 can	 give	 it,	 then	 certainly	 you	 are	 the	master.	This	will
look	 like	 a	 paradox,	 but	 let	me	 repeat	 it:	 you	 are	 the	 possessor	 only	 of	 that
which	you	give.	The	moment	you	give,	in	that	very	moment	you	have	become
a	possessor,	enriched;	giving	enriches	you.
Miserly	people	are	the	most	miserable	and	poor	people	in	the	world	–	poorer
than	 the	poor.	They	 cannot	 give:	 they	 are	 stuck.	They	go	on	hoarding.	Their
hoarding	becomes	a	burden	on	 their	being	–	 it	does	not	 free	 them.	 In	 fact,	 if
you	have	something	you	will	become	freer.	But	look	at	the	misers.	They	have
much,	 but	 they	 are	 burdened;	 they	 are	 not	 free.	 Even	 beggars	 are	 freer	 than
they.	What	has	happened	 to	 them?	They	have	used	 their	 throat	 center	 just	 to
receive.	Not	only	have	they	not	used	their	throat	center	to	give,	they	have	not
even	 moved	 to	 the	 second	 Freudian	 center,	 anal.	 These	 people	 are	 always
constipated;	 hoarders,	 misers,	 always	 suffer	 from	 constipation.	 Remember,	 I
am	not	saying	that	all	people	who	have	constipation	are	misers;	there	may	be
other	reasons.	But	misers	are	certainly	constipated.
Freud	 says	 that	 there	 is	 something	 in	 gold	 and	 excreta.	Both	 look	 yellow,
and	people	who	are	constipatory	are	too	attracted	to	gold.	Otherwise	gold	has
no	existential	value	–	some	psychological	value,	but	no	existential	value.	You
cannot	 eat	 it,	 you	 cannot	 drink	 it.	What	 can	you	do	with	 it?	Even	 a	 glass	 of
water	 is	more	 valuable	 existentially.	 But	why	 has	 gold	 become	 so	 valuable?
Why	are	people	so	obsessed	with	gold?	They	have	not	moved	from	the	oral	to
the	anal.	They	are	constipated	 in	 their	 inner	being.	Now	 their	whole	 life	will
reflect	their	constipation:	they	will	become	hoarders	of	gold.	Gold	is	symbolic.
The	yellowness	gives	them	some	idea.
Have	you	watched	small	children?	It	 is	difficult	 to	persuade	 them	to	go	 to
the	toilet,	they	have	almost	to	be	forced	to	go	to	the	toilet.	And	even	then	they
insist,	 “Nothing	 is	 happening.	Can	 I	 come	back?”	They	are	 learning	 the	 first
lessons	of	miserliness	–	how	to	hold	on.	How	to	hold	on,	how	not	to	give	even
that	which	 is	 useless,	 even	 that	 which	 is	 harmful	 if	 you	 keep	 it	 within	 you.
Even	poison	–	it	is	difficult	for	them	to	leave	it,	to	renounce	it.
I	have	heard	about	two	Buddhist	bhikkhus…
	
One	of	 them	was	a	miser	and	a	hoarder	and	he	used	 to	collect	money	and
keep	 it,	 and	 the	 other	 used	 to	 laugh	 at	 this	 foolish	 attitude.	Whatsoever	will
come	on	his	way,	he	will	use	 it,	he	will	never	hoard	 it.	One	night	 they	came
across	a	river.	It	was	evening;	the	sun	was	setting	and	it	was	dangerous	to	stay
there.	 They	 had	 to	 go	 to	 the	 other	 shore.	 There	 was	 a	 town;	 this	 side	 was
simply	wilderness.
The	hoarder	 said,	“Now	you	don’t	have	any	money,	 so	we	cannot	pay	 the
ferryman?	What	do	you	say	now	about	it?	You	are	against	hoarding.	Now	if	I
don’t	have	any	money	we	both	will	die.	You	see	the	point?”	He	said,	“Money	is
needed.”
The	man	who	believed	in	renunciation	laughed,	but	he	didn’t	say	anything.
Then	the	hoarder	paid	and	they	crossed	the	river;	they	reached	the	other	shore.
The	hoarder	again	said,	“Now	remember,	next	time	don’t	start	arguing	with
me.	You	 see?	Money	 helps.	Without	money	we	would	 have	 been	 dead.	 The
whole	night	on	the	other	shore,	it	was	dangerous	to	survive	–	wild	animals.”
The	other	bhikkhu	laughed	and	he	said,	“But	we	have	come	across	the	river
because	 you	 could	 renounce	 it.	 It	 is	 not	 because	 of	 hoarding	 that	 we	 have
survived.	If	you	had	insisted	on	hoarding	it	and	you	were	not	going	to	pay	the
ferryman,	we	would	have	died.	It	is	because	you	could	renounce	–	because	you
could	leave	it,	you	could	give	it	–	that’s	why	we	have	survived.”
	
The	 argument	 must	 be	 continuing	 still.	 But	 remember,	 I	 am	 not	 against
money.	I	am	all	for	it,	but	use	it!	Possess	it,	own	it;	but	your	ownership	arises
only	 the	moment	you	have	become	capable	of	 giving	 it.	At	 the	 throat	 center
this	new	synthesis	happens.	You	can	accept	and	you	can	give.
There	are	people	who	change	from	one	extreme	to	another.	First	they	were
incapable	of	giving,	they	could	only	receive;	then	they	change,	they	go	to	the
other	 extreme	 –	 now	 they	 can	 give	 but	 they	 cannot	 receive.	 That	 too	 is
lopsidedness.	A	real	man	is	capable	of	accepting	gifts	and	giving	them	back.	In
India	you	will	find	many	sannyasins,	many	so-called	mahatmas,	who	will	not
touch	 money.	 If	 you	 give	 them	 any,	 they	 will	 shrink	 back,	 as	 if	 you	 have
produced	 a	 snake	 or	 something	 poisonous.	 Their	 shrinking	 back	 shows	 that
now	they	have	moved	to	the	other	extreme:	now	they	have	become	incapable
of	 receiving.	Again	 their	 throat	 center	 is	half-functioning,	 and	a	 center	never
functions	really	unless	it	functions	fully	–	unless	the	wheel	moves	all	the	way,
goes	on	moving	and	creates	energy	fields.
Then	is	the	third-eye	center:	At	the	third-eye	center	the	right	and	left	meet,
pingala	 and	 ida	 meet,	 and	 become	 sushumna.	 The	 two	 hemispheres	 of	 the
brain	 meet	 at	 the	 third	 eye:	 that	 is	 just	 between	 the	 two	 eyes.	 One	 eye
represents	the	right,	another	eye	represents	the	left,	and	it	is	just	in	the	middle.
The	 left	 and	 right	 brains	 meeting	 at	 the	 third	 eye	 is	 a	 very	 high	 synthesis.
People	 have	 been	 capable	 of	 describing	 up	 to	 this	 point.	 That’s	 why
Ramakrishna	could	describe	up	 to	 the	 third	eye.	And	when	he	 started	 to	 talk
about	 the	 final,	 the	ultimate	 synthesis	 that	happens	at	sahasrar,	 he	 again	and
again	fell	into	silence,	into	samadhi.	He	was	drowned	in	it;	it	was	too	much.	It
was	 floodlike;	 he	 was	 taken	 over	 to	 the	 ocean.	 He	 could	 not	 keep	 himself
conscious,	alert.
The	ultimate	 synthesis	happens	at	sahasrar,	 the	 crown	chakra.	Because	of
this	sahasrar,	 all	over	 the	world	kings,	emperors,	monarchs,	and	queens,	use
the	crown.	It	has	become	formal,	but	basically	it	was	accepted	because	unless
your	sahasrar	 is	 functioning,	 how	can	you	be	 a	monarch,	 how	can	you	be	 a
king?	 How	 can	 you	 rule	 people	 if	 you	 have	 not	 even	 become	 a	 ruler	 of
yourself?	 In	 the	 symbol	 of	 the	 crown	 a	 secret	 is	 hidden.	The	 secret	 is	 that	 a
person	who	has	reached	to	the	crown	center,	the	ultimate	synthesis	of	his	being
–	only	he	should	be	the	king	or	the	queen,	nobody	else.	Only	he	is	capable	of
ruling	others,	because	he	has	come	to	rule	himself.	He	has	become	a	master	of
himself;	now	he	can	be	helpful	to	others	also.
Really,	when	you	achieve	to	sahasrar,	a	crown	flowers	within	you,	a	one-
thousand-petaled	 lotus	opens.	No	crown	can	be	compared	with	 it,	 but	 then	 it
became	 just	 a	 symbol	 and	 the	 symbol	 has	 existed	 all	 over	 the	 world.	 That
simply	 shows	 that	 everywhere	people	became	alert	 and	 aware	 in	one	way	or
other	 of	 the	 ultimate	 synthesis	 in	 the	 sahasrar.	 Jews	 use	 the	 skullcap	 –	 it	 is
exactly	on	 the	 sahasrar.	Hindus	 allow	a	bunch	of	hair,	 they	call	 it	choti,	 the
peak,	to	grow	exactly	on	the	spot	where	the	sahasrar	is,	or	has	to	be.	There	are
a	few	Christian	societies	which	shave	just	that	part	of	the	head.	When	a	master
blesses	a	disciple,	he	puts	his	hand	on	the	sahasrar.	And	if	the	disciple	is	really
receptive,	 surrendered,	 he	 will	 suddenly	 feel	 an	 upsurge	 of	 energy,	 running
from	the	sex	center	to	the	sahasrar.
Sometimes	when	I	touch	your	head	and	you	suddenly	become	sexual	don’t
be	afraid,	don’t	shrink	back,	because	that	is	how	it	should	be.	The	energy	is	at
the	 sex	 center.	 It	 starts	 uncoiling	 itself.	 You	 become	 afraid,	 you	 shrink,	 you
repress	it	–	what	is	happening?	And	becoming	sexual	at	the	feet	of	your	master
seems	 to	 be	 a	 little	 awkward,	 embarrassing.	 It	 is	 not.	Allow	 it,	 let	 it	 be,	 and
soon	you	will	see	it	has	passed	the	first	center	and	the	second	and,	if	you	are
surrendered,	within	a	second	the	energy	is	moving	at	the	sahasrar	and	you	will
have	a	feeling	of	a	new	opening	within	you.	That’s	why	a	disciple	is	supposed
to	bow	his	head,	so	the	master	can	touch	the	head.
The	 last	 synthesis	 is	of	object	and	subject,	 the	outer	and	 inner,	again.	 In	a
sexual	orgasm	outer	 and	 inner	meet,	 but	momentarily.	 In	 sahasrar	 they	meet
permanently.	That’s	why	I	say	one	has	 to	 travel	from	sex	 to	samadhi.	 In	sex,
ninety-nine	 percent	 is	 sex,	 one	 percent	 is	 sahasrar;	 in	 sahasrar,	 ninety-nine
percent	is	sahasrar,	one	percent	is	sex.	The	two	are	joined,	they	are	bridged,	by
deep	currents	of	 energy.	So	 if	you	have	enjoyed	 sex,	don’t	make	your	abode
there.	 Sex	 is	 just	 a	 glimpse	 of	 sahasrar.	 Sahasrar	 is	 going	 to	 deliver	 a
thousandfold,	a	millionfold,	a	bliss	to	you,	benediction	to	you.
The	outer	and	the	inner	meet,	“I”	and	“thou”	meet,	man	and	woman	meet,
yin	and	yang	meet;	and	the	meeting	is	absolute.	Then	there	is	no	parting,	then
there	is	no	divorce.
This	 is	 called	 yoga.	 Yoga	 means	 the	 meeting	 of	 the	 two	 into	 one.	 In
Christianity,	mystics	have	called	it	unio	mystica.	That	is	the	exact	translation	of
yoga	–	unio	mystica:	 the	mysterious	union.	At	 the	sahasrar	 the	alpha	and	the
omega	meet,	the	beginning	and	the	end.	The	beginning	is	in	the	sex	center,	sex
is	 your	 alpha;	 samadhi	 is	 your	 omega.	 And	 unless	 alpha	 and	 omega	 meet,
unless	 you	 have	 attained	 to	 this	 supreme	 union,	 you	 will	 remain	 miserable
because	your	destiny	is	that.	You	will	remain	unfulfilled.	You	can	be	fulfilled
only	at	this	highest	peak	of	synthesis.
Now	the	sutras.
Performing	samyama	on	their	power	of	cognition,
real	nature,	egoism,	all	pervasiveness,	and	functions
brings	mastery	over	the	sense	organs.
The	 first	 thing	 to	be	understood	 is	 that	you	have	 senses	but	you	have	 lost
sensitivity.	Your	senses	are	almost	dull,	dead.	They	are	there	hanging	with	you,
but	 energy	 is	 not	 flowing	 in	 them;	 they	 are	 not	 alive	 limbs	 of	 your	 being.
Something	 has	 deadened	 within	 you,	 has	 become	 cold,	 blocked.	 It	 has
happened	 to	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 because	 of	 thousands	 of	 years	 of
repression.	And	 thousands	of	 years	 of	 conditioning	 and	 ideologies	which	 are
against	the	body	have	crippled	you.	You	live	only	for	name’s	sake.
So	the	first	thing	to	be	done	is:	your	senses	should	become	really	alive	and
sensitive.	Only	 then	can	 they	be	mastered.	You	see	but	you	don’t	 see	deeply.
You	see	only	the	surface	of	 things.	You	touch	but	your	touch	has	no	warmth;
nothing	 flows	 in	 and	 out	 from	 your	 touch.	 You	 hear	 also.	 The	 birds	 go	 on
singing	 and	you	hear	 and	you	 can	 say,	 “Yes,	 I	 am	hearing,”	 and	you	 are	not
wrong	–	you	are	hearing,	but	it	never	reaches	to	the	very	core	of	your	being.	It
does	 not	 go	 dancing	 within	 you;	 it	 doesn’t	 help	 a	 flowering,	 an	 unfolding
within	you.
These	 senses	 have	 to	 be	 rejuvenated.	 Yoga	 is	 not	 against	 the	 body,
remember.	Yoga	says	go	beyond	the	body,	but	it	is	not	against	the	body.	Yoga
says	use	the	body,	don’t	be	used	by	it;	but	it	is	not	against	the	body.	Yoga	says
the	body	is	your	temple.	You	are	in	 the	body,	and	the	body	is	so	beautiful	an
organism,	 so	complex	and	 so	 subtle,	 so	mysterious,	 and	 so	many	dimensions
open	through	it.	And	those	are	the	only	doors	and	windows	you	will	reach	to
existence	 through.	 So	 don’t	 deaden	 them;	 make	 them	 more	 alive.	 Let	 them
vibrate,	 pulsate,	 and,	 what	 Stanley	 Keleman	 has	 said:	 “Let	 them	 ‘stream.’”
That	 is	 exactly	 the	 right	word:	 let	 them	 flow	 like	a	 stream,	 rushing.	You	can
have	the	sensation.	Your	hand,	if	it	is	rushing	like	a	stream	of	energy:	you	will
feel	a	tingling	sensation,	you	will	feel	something	inside	the	hand	is	flowing	and
wants	to	make	contact,	wants	to	be	connected.
When	you	love	a	woman	or	a	man	and	you	take	her	hand	in	your	hand,	 if
your	hand	is	not	streaming,	this	love	is	not	going	to	be	of	any	use.	If	your	hand
is	not	jumping	and	throbbing	with	energy	and	pouring	energy	into	your	woman
or	into	your	man,	then	this	love	is	almost	dead	from	the	very	beginning.	Then
this	child	is	not	born	alive.	Then	sooner	or	later	you	will	be	finished	–	you	are
already	finished.	It	will	take	a	little	time	to	recognize	because	your	mind	is	also
dull;	otherwise	you	would	not	enter	it	because	it	is	already	dead.	For	what	are
you	 entering?	 You	 take	 time	 to	 recognize	 things	 because	 your	 sensitivity,
brilliance,	intelligence,	is	so	clouded	and	confused.
Only	 a	 streaming	 love	 can	 become	 a	 source	 of	 blissfulness,	 of	 joy,	 of
delight.	But	for	that	you	will	need	your	senses	streaming.
Sometimes	you	have	that	glimpse	also;	and	everybody	had	it	when	he	was	a
child.	 Watch	 a	 child	 running	 after	 a	 butterfly.	 He	 is	 streaming,	 as	 if	 any
moment	he	can	 jump	out	of	his	body.	Watch	a	child	when	he	 is	 looking	at	 a
roseflower.	See	his	eyes,	the	brilliance,	the	light	that	comes	to	his	eyes.	He	is
streaming.	His	eyes	are	almost	dancing	on	the	petals	of	the	flower.
This	 is	 the	way	 to	 be:	 be	 riverlike.	And	only	 then	 is	 it	 possible	 to	master
these	senses.	In	fact,	people	have	had	a	very	wrong	attitude.	They	think	that	if
you	want	to	master	your	senses,	you	have	to	make	them	almost	dead.	But	then
what	is	the	point	of	mastering?	You	can	kill,	and	you	are	the	master.	You	can	sit
on	the	corpse.	But	what	is	the	point	of	being	a	master?	But	this	looked	easier:
first	kill	them	and	then	you	can	master.	If	the	body	feels	too	strong,	fast.	Make
it	weak,	and	then	you	start	feeling	that	you	are	the	master	–	but	you	have	killed
the	body.	Remember,	life	has	to	be	mastered,	not	dead	things.	They	will	not	be
of	any	use.
But	 this	 has	 been	 found	 to	 be	 a	 shortcut,	 so	 all	 the	 religions	 of	 the	world
have	been	using	it.	Destroy	your	body	by	and	by.	Disconnect	yourself	from	the
body.	 Don’t	 be	 in	 contact,	 remove	 yourself,	 become	 indifferent.	When	 your
body	is	almost	a	dead	tree	–	no	longer	do	leaves	come	to	it,	no	longer	does	it
flower,	no	longer	do	birds	come	to	rest.	It	is	just	a	dead	stump.	Of	course	you
can	master	it,	but	now	what	are	you	going	to	gain	from	this	mastery?
This	 is	 the	 problem;	 that’s	 why	 people	 don’t	 understand	 what	 Patanjali
means.
Performing	 samyama	 on	 their	 power	 of	 cognition…	Your	 eyes	 see,	 your
ears	hear,	your	nose	smells,	your	tongue	tastes,	your	hands	make	contact,	your
feet	make	connectedness	with	the	earth	–	that	is	their	power	of	cognition.
Performing	 samyama	 on	 their	 power	 of	 cognition…	But	 they	 have	 to	 be
powerful.	Otherwise	 you	will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 even	 feel	what	 power	 is.	 These
senses	have	to	be	so	full	of	power,	so	high	with	power,	 that	you	can	perform
samyama,	that	you	can	meditate	upon	them.
Right	now	when	you	look	at	a	flower,	the	flower	is	there,	but	have	you	ever
felt	your	eyes?	You	see	the	flower,	but	have	you	felt	the	power	of	your	eyes?	It
should	 be	 there	 because	 you	 are	 using	 your	 eyes	 to	 see	 the	 flower.	 And	 of
course,	 eyes	 are	more	 beautiful	 than	 any	 flower	 because	 all	 flowers	 have	 to
come	through	the	eyes.	It	 is	 through	the	eyes	that	you	have	become	aware	of
the	world	of	 flowers,	but	have	you	ever	 felt	 the	power	of	 the	eyes?	They	are
almost	 dull,	 dead.	 They	 have	 become	 passive,	 just	 like	 windows,	 receptive.
They	don’t	go	to	their	object.
And	power	means	being	active.	Power	means	your	eyes	going	and	almost
touching	 the	 flower,	 your	 ears	 going	 and	 almost	 touching	 the	 songs	 of	 the
birds,	 your	 hands	 going	 with	 the	 total	 energy	 in	 you,	 focused	 there	 and
touching	your	beloved.	Or	you	 are	 lying	down	on	 the	grass,	 and	your	whole
body,	full	of	power,	meeting	in	a	contact	with	the	grass,	having	a	dialogue	with
the	grass.	Or	you	are	swimming	in	the	river	and	whispering	with	the	river	and
listening	to	the	whispers	of	the	river	–	connected,	in	communion	–	but	power	is
needed.
So	the	first	thing	I	would	like	you	to	do	is	when	you	see,	really	see,	become
the	eyes.	Forget	everything.	Let	your	whole	energy	flow	through	the	eyes.	Your
eyes	will	be	cleaned,	bathed	in	an	inner	shower,	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	that
these	 trees	are	no	 longer	 the	same,	 the	greenery	 is	no	 longer	 the	same.	 It	has
become	greener,	 as	 if	 dust	 has	 disappeared	 from	 it.	The	 dust	was	 not	 on	 the
trees,	it	was	on	your	eyes.	And	you	will	see	for	the	first	time	and	you	will	hear
for	the	first	time.
Jesus	goes	on	saying	 to	his	disciples,	“If	you	have	ears	 listen.	 If	you	have
eyes	see.”	They	were	not	all	blind,	and	 they	were	not	all	deaf.	What	does	he
mean?	He	means	that	you	have	almost	become	deaf	and	almost	become	blind.
You	see	and	yet	you	don’t	see.	You	hear	yet	you	don’t	hear.	It	is	not	a	power,	it
is	not	energy,	it	is	not	vital.
Performing	 samyana	on	 their	 power	of	 cognition,	 real	 nature…	Then	you
will	be	able	to	see	what	is	the	real	nature	of	your	senses.	It	is	divine.	Your	body
embodies	the	divine.	It	is	the	divine	who	has	looked	through	your	eyes.
I	 remember	 Meister	 Eckhart’s	 famous	 saying.	 The	 day	 he	 realized	 and
became	enlightened,	his	friends	and	disciples	and	brothers	asked,	“What	have
you	 seen?”	He	 laughed.	He	 is	 the	only	one	 in	 the	whole	of	Christianity	who
comes	very	close	to	Zen	masters,	almost	a	Zen	master.	He	laughed.	He	said,	“I
have	 not	 seen	 the	 divine.	 It	 has	 seen	 itself	 through	me.	 The	 divine	 has	 seen
itself	through	me.	These	eyes	are	the	divine’s.	And	what	a	game,	what	a	play.	It
has	seen	itself	through	me.”
When	you	really	feel	the	nature	of	your	senses,	you	will	feel	it	is	divine.	It	is
existence	who	has	moved	through	your	hand.	It	is	existence’s	hand.	All	hands
are	 its.	 It	 is	 existence	 who	 has	 loved	 through	 you.	 All	 love	 affairs	 are
existence’s.	And	how	can	 it	 be	 otherwise?	Hindus	 call	 it	 leela	 –	 a	 play.	 It	 is
existence	who	 is	 calling	 you	 through	 the	 cuckoo,	 and	 it	 is	 existence	who	 is
listening	through	you.	It	is	it	and	it	alone	spread	all	over.
Performing	samyama	on	 their	power	of	cognition,	 real	nature,	egoism,	all-
pervasiveness,	and	functions	brings	mastery	over	the	sense	organs.	This	word
egoism	has	to	be	understood	because	in	Sanskrit	we	have	three	words	for	the
ego	and	in	English	there	is	only	one	word.	That	creates	difficulty.	The	Sanskrit
word	in	the	sutra	is	asmita,	so	let	me	first	explain	it	to	you.
There	are	three	words:	ahankar,	asmita,	atma.	All	mean	I.	Ahankar	can	be
translated	as	 the	ego	–	 the	very	gross,	 too	much	emphasis	on	“I.”	For	asmita
there	is	no	word	in	English.	Asmita	means	amness.	I	am;	in	ego	the	emphasis	is
on	“I”;	in	asmita	 the	emphasis	 is	on	“am.”	Amness,	purer	 than	ego.	Still	 it	 is
there,	 but	 in	 a	 very	 different	 form.	 Amness.	 And	 atma:	 even	 amness	 has
disappeared.	 In	 the	 ego	 “I	 am”;	 in	asmita	 only	 “am”;	 in	atma	 even	 that	 has
disappeared.	In	atma	there	is	pure	being,	neither	I	nor	amness.
In	 this	 sutra,	 asmita	 is	 used,	 amness.	 Remember,	 the	 ego	 is	 of	 the	mind;
senses	have	no	ego.	They	have	a	certain	amness	but	no	ego.	The	ego	is	of	the
mind.	 Your	 eyes	 don’t	 have	 any	 ego;	 your	 hands	 don’t	 have	 any	 ego.	 They
have	 a	 certain	 amness.	 That’s	 why	 if	 your	 skin	 has	 to	 be	 replaced	 and
somebody	 else’s	 skin	 is	 planted	 on	 you,	 your	 body	will	 reject	 it	 because	 the
body	knows	“it	is	not	mine.”	So	your	own	skin	has	to	be	replaced	from	some
other	 part	 of	 the	 body,	 from	 your	 thighs.	Your	 own	 skin	 has	 to	 be	 replaced,
otherwise	the	body	will	reject.	The	body	will	not	accept	it:	“It	is	not	mine.”	The
body	has	no	I	but	it	has	an	amness.
If	you	need	blood,	anybody’s	blood	won’t	do.	The	body	will	not	accept	all
sorts	 of	 blood,	 only	 a	 particular	 blood.	 It	 has	 its	 own	 amness.	 That	 will	 be
accepted;	some	other	blood	will	be	 rejected.	The	body	has	 its	own	feel	of	 its
being	–	very	unconscious,	very	subtle	and	pure,	but	it	is	there.
Your	eyes	are	yours,	just	like	your	thumbprints.	Everything	yours	is	yours.
Now	physiologists	say	that	everybody’s	heart	is	different,	of	a	different	shape.
In	physiology	books,	the	picture	that	you	will	find	is	not	a	real	picture.	It	is	just
average.	 It	 is	 just	 imagined.	 Otherwise	 each	 person’s	 heart	 has	 a	 different
shape.	Even	each	person’s	kidney	has	 a	different	 shape.	These	parts	 all	 have
their	signatures;	everybody	is	so	unique.	That	is	the	amness.
You	 will	 never	 be	 here	 again,	 you	 have	 never	 been	 before,	 so	 move
cautiously	 and	 alertly	 and	 happily.	 Just	 think:	 the	 glory	 of	 your	 being.	 Just
think:	that	you	are	so	superb	and	unique.	Existence	has	vested	much	in	you	–
never	 imitate	 because	 that	 will	 be	 a	 betrayal.	 Be	 yourself.	 Let	 that	 be	 your
religion.	All	else	is	politics.	Don’t	be	a	Hindu,	don’t	be	a	Mohammedan,	don’t
be	a	Christian.	Be	religious,	but	there	is	only	one	religion,	and	that	is	just	being
yourself,	authentically	yourself.
Performing	samyama	on	their	power	of	cognition,	real	nature,	–	asmita,	the
subtle	amness	–	all-pervasiveness,	and	functions	brings	mastery	over	the	sense
organs.	 And	 if	 you	 meditate	 on	 these	 things,	 you	 will	 become	 a	 master.
Meditation	 brings	mastery;	 nothing	 else	 brings	mastery	 except	meditation.	 If
you	meditate	on	your	eye,	first	you	will	see	the	roseflower;	by	and	by	you	will
be	able	to	see	the	eye	that	is	seeing.	Then	you	have	become	a	master	of	the	eye.
Once	you	have	seen	the	seeing	eye,	you	have	become	a	master.	Now	you	can
use	all	its	energies;	and	they	are	all-pervasive.	Your	eyes	are	not	as	limited	as
you	think	them	to	be.	They	can	see	many	more	things	which	you	have	not	seen.
They	 can	 penetrate	 many	 more	 mysteries	 that	 you	 have	 not	 even	 dreamed
about.	But	you	are	not	master	of	your	eyes,	and	you	have	used	them	in	a	very
haphazard	way,	not	knowing	what	you	are	doing.
And	in	contact	so	much	with	objects,	you	have	forgotten	the	subjectivity	of
your	 eyes.	 It	 happens	 if	 you	 keep	 company	with	 someone	 –	 by	 and	 by	 you
become	 influenced	 by	 him.	You	 have	 been	 in	 contact	with	 objects	 too	much
and	you	have	forgotten	the	inner	quality	of	your	senses.	You	see	things,	but	you
never	 see	 your	 seeing.	 You	 hear	 the	 songs,	 but	 you	 never	 hear	 the	 subtle
vibration	that	goes	on	within	you,	the	sound	of	your	being.
Let	me	tell	you	an	anecdote…
	
I	have	heard	that	an	extremely	confident	tramp	had	enormous	nerve.	He	had
just	completed	a	very	large	meal	in	a	swanky	restaurant	when	he	announced	to
the	 manager,	 “My	 good	 man,	 I	 have	 really	 enjoyed	 your	 food,	 but
unfortunately	I	cannot	afford	to	pay	for	any	of	it	at	all.	I	have	not	a	penny	to
my	name.
“Now	 don’t	 get	 angry.	 I	 am	 by	 profession	 a	 beggar,	 as	 you	 may	 see.	 I
happen	 to	 be	 an	 extremely	 talented	 beggar	 too.	 I	 can	 go	 out	 and	within	 one
hour	get	the	money	I	owe	you	for	this	meal.	Naturally	though,	you	cannot	trust
me	to	come	back,	and	this	I	fully	understand.	You	would	be	most	welcome	to
accompany	me,	but	can	a	man	like	you,	a	well-known	restaurant	owner,	afford
to	be	seen	with	a	man	of	my	caliber?	No.	So	I	have,	sir,	the	perfect	solution	to
our	little	problem.	I	will	wait	here	and	you	go	out	and	beg	until	you	have	the
cost	of	this	meal.”
	
If	 you	 keep	 company	 with	 a	 beggar,	 you	 will	 become	 a	 beggar.	 He	 will
suggest	in	a	thousand	and	one	ways	to	you	to	become	like	him.
We	 have	 kept	 company	 with	 objects	 so	 long	 that	 we	 have	 forgotten	 our
subjectivity.	We	have	 remained	 focused	 outwardly	 so	 long	 on	 things	 that	we
have	 forgotten	 that	 we	 are	 persons.	 This	 long	 association	 with	 objects	 has
completely	destroyed	your	image	of	yourself.	You	have	to	come	back	home.
In	yoga,	when	you	 start	 seeing	your	 seeing	eye,	you	come	across	 a	 subtle
energy.	They	call	it	tanmatra.	When	you	can	see	your	eye	seeing,	just	hidden
behind	the	eyes	you	see	a	tremendous	energy	–	that	is	tanmatra,	the	energy	of
the	eye.	Behind	the	ear	you	see	tremendous	energy	accumulated,	 tanmatra	of
the	 ear.	Behind	your	genital	 organs	you	 see	 tremendous	 energy	accumulated,
tanmatra	 of	 sexuality.	 And	 so	 on,	 so	 forth.	 Everywhere	 behind	 your	 senses
there	is	a	pool	of	energy,	unused.	Once	you	know	it,	you	can	pour	that	energy
into	your	eyes,	and	then	you	will	see	visions	which	only	sometimes	poets	see,
painters	see.	Then	you	will	hear	sounds	which	only	sometimes	musicians	hear,
poets	 hear.	 And	 then	 you	 will	 touch	 things	 which	 only	 sometimes	 in	 rare
moments	lovers	know	how	to	touch.
You	will	become	alive,	streaming.
Ordinarily	you	have	been	taught	to	repress	your	senses,	not	to	know	them.	It
is	very	foolish,	but	very	convenient.
It	happened…
	
After	a	rural	wedding,	the	bride	and	the	groom	climbed	into	the	wagon	and
set	out	for	their	farm	home.	About	a	mile	down	the	road,	the	horse	stumbled.
“That’s	one!”	shouted	the	groom.
They	continued	on	and	the	horse	stumbled	again.	“That	is	two!”	shouted	the
groom.
As	they	neared	the	farm,	the	horse	stumbled	again.	“That	is	three!”	shouted
the	 groom	 and,	 seizing	 a	 gun	 from	 behind	 the	 seat,	 put	 a	 bullet	 through	 the
horse’s	brain.
The	bride	sat	aghast.	Then,	in	no	uncertain	terms,	she	told	her	new	husband
what	she	thought	of	his	action.	He	sat	quietly	until	she	subsided,	then	pointed
at	her	and	shouted,	“That	is	one!”
The	couple	lived	happily	for	sixty	years.
	
But	that	happiness	cannot	be	real	happiness.	Easy	to	repress	at	the	point	of	a
gun,	but	then	what	sort	of	love	will	happen	between	these	two	people?	The	gun
will	always	stand	in	between,	and	the	wife	will	always	be	afraid	that	now	any
moment	he	is	going	to	say,	“Now	this	is	two!	Now	this	is	three!”	and	finished!
That’s	what	 you	 have	 done	with	 your	 senses,	with	 your	 body	 –	 you	 have
repressed	 it.	 But	 you	were	 helpless.	 I	 don’t	 say	 that	 you	 are	 responsible	 for
repressing	it.	You	were	brought	up	in	such	a	way,	nobody	allowed	your	senses
freedom.	 In	 the	 name	 of	 love,	 only	 repression	 continues.	 The	 mothers,	 the
fathers,	 the	 society,	 they	go	on	 repressing.	By	and	by	 they	 teach	you	a	 trick,
and	 the	 trick	 is	 not	 to	 accept	 yourself,	 deny.	Everything	has	 to	 be	 channeled
into	 conformity.	Your	wilderness	has	 to	be	 thrown	 into	 the	dark	part	 of	your
soul	and	a	small	corner	has	to	be	clean,	like	a	drawing	room,	where	you	can	see
people,	meet	people,	and	live	and	forget	all	about	your	wilder	being:	your	real
existence.	 Your	 fathers	 and	 your	 mothers	 are	 not	 responsible	 either	 because
they	were	brought	up	in	the	same	way.
So	nobody	is	responsible.	But	once	you	know	it,	and	you	don’t	do	anything,
then	 you	 become	 responsible.	 Being	 near	me	 I	 am	 going	 to	make	 you	 very,
very	responsible	because	you	will	know	it,	and	then	if	you	don’t	do	anything,
then	you	cannot	throw	the	responsibility	on	anybody	else.	Then	you	are	going
to	be	responsible!
Now	you	know	about	how	you	have	destroyed	your	senses,	and	you	know
also	how	to	revive	them.	Do	something.	Throw	the	gun	away	completely,	 the
repressive	 mind	 completely.	 Unblock	 yourself.	 Start	 flowing	 again,	 start
connecting	again	with	your	being,	start	connecting	with	your	senses	again.	You
are	 like	 a	 disconnected	 telephone	 line.	 Everything	 looks	 perfectly	 okay,	 the
telephone	is	there	but	the	line	is	disconnected.	Your	eyes	are	there,	your	hands
are	there,	your	ears	are	there,	but	the	line	is	disconnected.	Reconnect	it.	If	it	can
be	 disconnected,	 it	 can	 be	 reconnected.	Others	 have	 disconnected	 it	 because
they	were	also	taught	in	the	same	way,	but	you	can	reconnect	it.
All	my	meditations	 are	 to	 give	 you	 a	 streaming	 energy.	That’s	why	 I	 call
them	 dynamic	 methods.	 Old	 meditations	 were	 just	 to	 sit	 silently,	 not	 to	 do
anything.	 I	 give	 you	 active	 methods	 because	 when	 you	 are	 streaming	 with
energy	you	can	sit	silently,	that	will	do,	but	right	now	first	you	have	to	become
alive.
From	this	follows	instantaneous	cognition
without	the	use	of	the	body,
and	complete	mastery	over	pradhana,	prakriti,	the	material	world.
If	 you	 can	 see	 tanmatras,	 the	 subtle	 energies	 of	 your	 senses,	 you	 will
become	capable	of	using	your	cognition	without	the	grosser	instruments.	If	you
know	that	behind	the	eye	there	is	an	accumulated	pool	of	energy,	you	can	close
your	 eyes	 and	use	 that	 energy	directly.	Then	you	will	 be	 able	 to	 see	without
opening	your	eyes.	That’s	what	telepathy,	clairvoyance,	clairaudience	is.
In	Russia,	 there	 is	 a	woman	who	 has	 been	 investigated	 scientifically	who
stands	 just	 twenty	 feet	 away	 from	 any	 object	 and	 starts	 pulling	 it,	 just	 by
energy.	She	makes	movements	with	her	hands,	twenty	feet	away,	as	you	have
seen	 a	 hypnotist	 making	 passes,	 she	 simply	 draws,	 gestures.	 Within	 fifteen
minutes,	 things	 start	 moving	 toward	 her.	 She	 has	 not	 touched	 them.	 Much
investigation	has	been	done	about	what	happens.	And	that	woman	loses	at	least
half	a	pound	in	weight	in	a	half-hour	experiment.	Certainly	she	is	losing	some
sort	of	energy.
This	is	what	yoga	calls	tanmatra.	Ordinarily	you	use	the	energy	through	the
hand,	when	you	pick	something	up:	a	stone,	a	rock.	You	carry	it;	you	use	the
same	energy	 through	 the	hand.	But	 if	you	know	 the	energy	directly,	you	can
drop	the	use	of	the	hand.	The	energy	can	move	the	object	directly.	In	the	same
way	 –	 telepathy:	 you	 can	 hear	 or	 read	 people’s	 thoughts	 or	 can	 see	 faraway
scenes.	Once	you	know	the	 tanmatra,	 the	subtle	energy	 that	 is	being	used	by
your	eyes,	 the	eyes	can	be	discarded.	Once	you	know	that	 it	 is	not	 really	 the
sense	that	is	functioning	but	the	energy,	you	are	freed	of	the	sense.
I	have	heard	a	story…
	
So	this	guy	phoned	Cohen	&	Goldberg,	wholesalers.
“Put	me	through	to	Mr.	Cohen,	please.”
“I	am	afraid	Mr.	Cohen	has	gone	out,	sir,”	said	the	switchboard	girl.
“Then	get	me	Mr.	Goldberg.”
“I	am	afraid	Mr.	Goldberg	is	tied	up	at	present,	sir.”
“Okay,	I	will	phone	back	later.”
Ten	minutes	later:	“Mr.	Goldberg,	please.”
“I	am	afraid	Mr.	Goldberg	is	still	tied	up,	sir.”
“I	will	phone	back.”
Half	an	hour	later:	“Get	me	Mr.	Goldberg.”
“I	am	terribly	sorry,	sir,	but	Mr.	Goldberg	is	still	tied	up.”
“I	will	phone	back.”
Another	half	an	hour	later:	“Goldberg!”
“I	have	dreadful	news	for	you,	sir.	Mr.	Goldberg	is	still	tied	up.”
“But	 look,	 this	 is	 ridiculous.	 How	 can	 you	 run	 a	 business	 like	 that?	 One
partner	 is	out	 all	morning	and	 the	other	 is	 tied	up	 for	hours	on	end.	What	 is
going	on	there?”
“Well,	you	see,	sir,	whenever	Mr.	Cohen	goes	out,	he	ties	up	Mr.	Goldberg.”
	
This	is	what	is	happening	inside	you	also.	Whenever	you	go	out,	through	the
eyes,	 through	 the	 hands,	 through	 your	 genital	 organs,	 through	 your	 ears	 –
whenever	 you	 go	 out,	 continuously	 a	 certain	 type	 of	 bondage	 and	 tying	 is
created.	By	and	by	you	become	 tight	with	 the	particular	 sense	–	eyes,	 ears	–
because	 that	 is	 from	where	 you	 go	 out,	 again,	 again,	 again.	 By	 and	 by	 you
forget	the	energy	that	is	going	out.
This	getting	into	bondage	with	the	senses	 is	 the	whole	world,	 the	samsara.
How	 to	 untie	 yourself	 from	 the	 senses?	 And	 once	 you	 are	 tied	 up	 with	 the
senses,	you	start	thinking	in	terms	of	them.	You	forget	yourself.
Another	story…
	
A	disciple	wanted	very	much	to	renounce	the	world	and	follow	his	guru,	but
he	said	that	his	wife	and	family	loved	him	too	much	and	he	was	unable	to	leave
his	home.
The	guru	came	up	with	a	plan.	The	man	was	taught	certain	yogic	secrets	so
that	he	could	give	the	appearance	to	all	who	looked	upon	his	body	that	he	was
deceased.	 The	 next	 day	 the	 man	 followed	 instructions	 and	 his	 body	 was
besieged	with	the	wailings	and	sobbings	of	his	wife	and	family.
The	guru	appeared	at	the	door	in	the	guise	of	a	magician	and	told	the	family
that	 if	 they	loved	this	man	so	much,	he	could	bring	him	back	to	life.	He	said
that	 the	 man	 would	 live	 if	 someone	 would	 die	 in	 his	 place	 by	 drinking	 the
potion	he	had.
Each	member	of	the	family	had	an	excuse	that	made	it	necessary	to	keep	his
own	life,	and	the	wife	added,	“Anyway,	he	is	already	dead;	we	will	manage.”
At	this	the	yogi	stood	up	and	said,	“Woman,	if	you	can	live	without	me,	then
I	can	go	with	my	guru.”	He	faced	the	teacher	and	said,	“Let	us	go,	sir,	Revered
Master.	I	will	follow	you.”
	
The	whole	 attachment	 to	 the	 senses	 is	 as	 if	 you	are	 the	 senses,	 as	 if	 you
cannot	live	without	them,	as	if	your	whole	life	is	confined	to	them.	But	you	are
not	confined	to	them.	You	can	renounce	them,	and	you	can	still	 live,	and	live
on	a	higher	plane.	Difficult!	Just	as	if	you	want	to	persuade	a	seed,	“Die,	and
soon	a	beautiful	plant	will	be	born.”	How	can	he	believe,	because	he	will	be
dead?	No	seed	has	ever	known	that	by	his	death	a	new	sprout	comes	up,	a	new
life	 arises.	 So	 how	 to	 believe	 it?	Or	 if	 you	 go	 near	 an	 egg	 and	 you	want	 to
persuade	the	bird	within,	“Come	out,”	but	how	is	the	bird	to	believe	that	there
is	any	possibility	of	 life	without	 the	egg?	Or	 if	you	 talk	 to	a	child	 inside	 the
womb	 of	 a	mother	 and	 tell	 him,	 “Come	 out,	 don’t	 be	 afraid,”	 but	 he	 knows
nothing	outside	the	womb.	The	womb	has	been	his	whole	life;	he	knows	only
that.	He	is	afraid.	The	same	is	the	situation:	surrounded	by	the	senses,	we	live
in	a	sort	of	confinement,	an	imprisonment.
One	has	to	be	a	little	daring,	courageous.	Right	now,	wherever	you	are	and
whatsoever	 you	 are,	 nothing	 is	 happening	 to	 you.	 Then	 take	 the	 risk.	 Then
move	into	the	unknown.	Then	try	to	find	a	new	way	of	life.
From	this	follows	instantaneous	cognition	without	the	use	of	the	body,	and
complete	mastery	over	prakriti,	 the	material	world.	Up	to	now	you	have	been
possessed	 by	 the	 material	 world.	 Once	 you	 know	 that	 you	 have	 your	 own
energy,	totally	independent	from	the	material	world,	you	become	a	master.	No
longer	 does	 world	 possess	 you;	 you	 possess	 it.	 Only	 those	 who	 renounce
become	the	real	masters.
Only	after	the	awareness	of	the	distinction
between	sattva	and	purusha
does	supremacy	and	knowledge	arise
over	all	states	of	existence.
And	the	subtlest	discrimination	has	to	be	made	between	sattva	and	purusha
–	intelligence	and	awareness.	It	is	very	easy	to	separate	yourself	from	the	body.
The	body	is	so	gross	you	can	feel	it,	you	cannot	be	it.	You	must	be	inside	it.	It
is	easy	to	see	that	you	cannot	be	the	eyes.	You	must	be	someone	hidden	behind
who	looks	 through	the	eyes;	otherwise	who	will	 look	 through	the	eyes?	Your
glasses	 cannot	 look.	Behind	 the	glasses,	 eyes	 are	 needed.	Your	 eyes	 are	 also
like	 glasses.	They	are	 glasses;	 they	 cannot	 look.	You	 are	 needed	 somewhere
behind	to	look.
But	the	subtlest	identification	is	with	intelligence.	Your	power	to	think,	your
power	 of	 intellect,	 understanding,	 is	 the	 subtlest	 thing.	 It	 is	 very	 difficult	 to
discriminate	between	awareness	and	intelligence.	But	it	can	be	discriminated.
By	 and	 by,	 step-by-step,	 first,	 know	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 body.	 Let	 that
understanding	grow	deep,	crystallize.	Then	know	that	you	are	not	 the	senses.
Let	 that	 understanding	 grow,	 crystallize.	 Then	 know	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the
tanmatras,	 the	 energy	pools	behind	 the	 senses.	Let	 that	grow	and	crystallize.
And	then	you	will	be	able	to	see	that	intelligence	is	also	a	pool	of	energy.	It	is
the	 common	 pool,	 in	 which	 eyes	 pour	 their	 energy,	 ears	 pour	 their	 energy,
hands	 pour	 their	 energy.	All	 the	 senses	 are	 like	 rivers	 and	 intelligence	 is	 the
central	thing,	in	which	they	bring	information	and	pour.
Whatever	your	mind	knows	 is	given	by	 the	 senses.	You	have	 seen	colors:
your	 mind	 knows	 them.	 If	 you	 are	 color-blind,	 if	 you	 cannot	 see	 the	 color
green,	then	your	mind	does	not	know	anything	about	green.
	
Bernard	Shaw	lived	his	whole	life	unaware	that	he	was	color-blind.	It	is	very
difficult	to	come	to	know	it,	but	one	accidental	incident	allowed	him	to	become
aware.	On	one	of	his	birthdays	somebody	presented	him	a	suit,	but	the	tie	was
missing,	so	he	went	to	the	market	to	find	a	tie	which	could	fit	with	the	suit.	The
suit	 was	 green,	 and	 he	 started	 purchasing	 a	 yellow	 tie.	 His	 secretary	 was
watching,	and	she	asked,	“What	are	you	doing?	It	won’t	fit.	The	suit	is	green
and	the	tie	is	yellow.”
He	said,	“Is	there	a	difference	between	these	two?”
	
For	seventy	years	he	had	lived	not	knowing	that	he	could	not	see	yellow.	He
saw	green.	Whether	it	was	yellow	or	green,	both	colors	looked	green.	Yellow
was	not	part	of	his	mind;	the	eyes	never	poured	that	information	into	the	mind.
The	eyes	are	like	servants,	 information	collectors,	public	relations	officers,
roaming	all	over	 the	world,	collecting	things,	pouring	into	 the	mind.	They	go
on	feeding	the	mind;	the	mind	is	the	central	pool.
First	you	have	to	become	aware	that	you	are	not	the	eye,	not	the	energy	that
is	 hidden	 behind	 the	 eye,	 then	 you	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 every	 sense	 is
pouring	 into	 the	mind.	You	 are	 not	 this	mind,	 also.	 You	 are	 the	 one	who	 is
seeing	it	being	poured.	You	are	just	standing	on	the	bank,	all	the	rivers	pouring
into	the	ocean	–	you	are	the	watcher,	the	witness.
Swami	Ram	has	 said:	 “Science	 is	difficult	 to	define,	but	perhaps	 the	most
essential	feature	of	it	involves	the	study	of	something	which	is	external	to	the
observer.	The	techniques	of	meditation	offer	an	approach	which	allows	one	to
be	external	to	one’s	own	internal	states.”
“The	 techniques	 of	 meditation	 offer	 an	 approach	 which	 allows	 one	 to	 be
external	 to	 one’s	 own	 internal	 states”	 –	 and	 the	 ultimate	 of	meditation	 is	 to
know	that	whatever	you	can	know,	you	are	not	it.	Whatever	can	be	reduced	to	a
known	object,	you	are	not	it,	because	you	cannot	be	reduced	to	an	object.	You
remain	eternally	subject	–	the	knower,	the	knower,	the	knower.	And	the	knower
can	never	be	reduced	to	the	known.
This	is	purusha,	awareness.	This	is	the	final	understanding	that	arises	out	of
yoga.	Meditate	over	it.
	
Chapter	9:	The	Subtle	Bodies	According	to	Patanjali
	
The	yoga	system	of	Patanjali	is	not	a	philosophical	system.	It	is	empirical;	it
is	a	tool	to	work	with	–	but	still	it	has	a	philosophy.	That	too,	is	just	to	give	an
intellectual	understanding	of	where	you	are	moving,	what	you	are	seeking.	But
philosophy	is	arbitrary,	utilitarian,	 just	 to	give	a	comprehensive	picture	of	 the
territory	you	are	going	to	discover;	but	the	philosophy	has	to	be	understood.
The	 first	 thing	 about	 Patanjali’s	 philosophy	 is	 that	 he	 divides	 human
personality	into	five	seeds,	five	bodies.	He	says	you	don’t	have	one	body;	you
have	layers	upon	layers	of	bodies	–	five	layers.
The	first	body	he	calls	annamay	kosh	–	the	food	body,	the	earth	body,	which
is	made	of	earth	and	is	constantly	to	be	nourished	by	food.	Food	comes	from
the	earth.	If	you	stop	taking	food,	your	annamay	kosh	will	wither	away.	So	one
has	 to	be	very	alert	 to	what	one	 is	eating	because	 that	makes	you	and	 it	will
affect	you	 in	millions	of	ways.	Sooner	or	 later	your	food	 is	not	 just	 food	–	 it
becomes	blood,	your	bones,	your	very	marrow.	It	circulates	in	your	being	and
goes	on	affecting	you.	So	the	purity	of	food	creates	a	pure	annamay	kosh	–	the
pure	food	body.
And	 if	 the	 first	 body	 is	 pure,	 light,	 not	 heavy,	 then	 it	 is	 easy	 to	 enter	 the
second	body;	otherwise	it	will	be	difficult,	you	will	be	loaded.	Have	you	seen
that	when	you	have	eaten	too	much,	and	heavy	foods…?	Immediately	you	start
feeling	 a	 sort	 of	 sleep,	 a	 sort	 of	 lethargy.	 You	 would	 like	 to	 go	 to	 sleep;
awareness	immediately	starts	disappearing.	When	the	first	body	is	loaded	it	is
difficult	to	create	great	awareness.	Hence	fasting	became	so	important	in	all	the
religions.	But	fasting	is	a	science	and	one	should	not	fool	around	with	it.
Just	 the	 other	 night	 a	 sannyasin	 came	 and	 she	 told	me	 that	 she	 has	 been
fasting	and	now	her	whole	body,	her	whole	being,	is	disturbed	–	tremendously
disturbed.	Now	the	stomach	is	not	functioning	well,	and	when	the	stomach	is
not	 functioning	 well,	 everything	 is	 weakened,	 the	 vitality	 is	 lost,	 and	 you
cannot	be	alive.	You	become	more	and	more	insensitive	and	dead.
But	 fasting	 is	 important.	 It	 should	 be	 done	 very	 carefully;	 one	 should
understand	the	functioning	of	the	annamay	kosh	–	only	then.	And	it	should	be
done	under	the	proper	guidance	of	one	who	has	moved	through	all	the	phases
of	his	annamay	kosh.	Not	only	that,	one	who	has	gone	beyond	it	and	who	can
look	 at	 the	annamay	 kosh	 as	 a	witness;	 otherwise	 fasting	 can	 be	 dangerous.
Then,	 just	 the	 right	 amount	 of	 food	 and	 the	 right	 quality	 of	 food	 has	 to	 be
practiced;	fasting	is	not	needed.
But	this	is	important	because	this	is	your	first	body	and,	more	or	less,	people
cling	to	their	first	body;	they	never	move	to	the	second.	Millions	of	people	are
not	even	aware	that	they	have	a	second	body,	a	deeper	body,	hidden	behind	the
first	sheath.	The	first	covering	is	very	gross.
The	second	body	Patanjali	calls	pranamay	kosh	–	 the	energy	body,	electric
body.	 The	 second	 consists	 of	 electric	 fields.	 That’s	 what	 acupuncture	 is	 all
about.	 This	 second	 body	 is	 more	 subtle	 than	 the	 first,	 and	 people	 who	 start
moving	 from	 the	 first	 body	 to	 the	 second	 become	 fields	 of	 energy,
tremendously	attractive,	magnetic,	hypnotic.	If	you	go	near	them,	you	will	feel
vitalized,	charged.
If	you	go	near	a	man	who	lives	only	in	his	food	body,	you	will	be	depleted	–
he	will	suck	you.	Many	times	you	come	across	people	and	you	feel	 that	 they
suck	you.	After	they	have	left,	you	feel	depleted,	dissipated,	as	if	somebody	has
exploited	 your	 energy.	 The	 first	 body	 is	 a	 sucker,	 and	 the	 first	 body	 is	 very
gross.	So	 if	 you	 live	 too	much	with	 first	 body-oriented	people,	 you	will	 feel
always	burdened,	 tense,	bored,	 sleepy,	with	no	energy,	always	at	 the	point	of
the	lowest	rung	of	your	energy;	and	you	will	not	have	any	energy	which	can	be
used	for	higher	growth.
This	 type,	 the	 first	 type,	 the	annamay-kosh	 oriented	person	 lives	 for	 food.
He	 eats	 and	 eats	 and	 eats,	 and	 that’s	 his	 whole	 life.	 He	 remains	 in	 a	 way
childish.	The	first	thing	that	the	child	does	in	the	world	is	to	suck	air,	and	then
to	suck	milk.	The	first	thing	the	child	has	to	do	in	the	world	is	to	help	the	food
body,	and	 if	 a	person	 remains	 food	addicted,	he	 remains	childish;	his	growth
suffers.
The	second	body,	pranamay	kosh,	gives	you	a	new	freedom,	gives	you	more
space.	 The	 second	 body	 is	 bigger	 than	 the	 first;	 it	 is	 not	 confined	 to	 your
physical	body.	It	is	inside	the	physical	body	and	it	is	outside	the	physical	body;
it	surrounds	you	 like	a	subtle	climate,	an	aura	of	energy.	Now	in	Russia	 they
have	discovered	that	photographs	can	be	taken	of	this	energy	body.	They	call	it
“bioplasma,”	 but	 it	 exactly	 means	 prana	 –	 the	 energy,	 elan	 vital,	 or	 what
Taoists	call	chi.	It	can	be	photographed;	now	it	has	become	almost	scientific.
A	very	great	discovery	has	been	done	in	Russia,	and	that	is	that	before	your
physical	body	suffers	an	illness	the	energy	body	suffers	it	–	six	months	before	–
then	it	happens	to	the	physical	body.	If	you	are	going	to	have	tuberculosis,	or
cancer,	 or	 any	 illness,	 your	 energy	 body	 starts	 showing	 indications	 of	 it	 six
months	 before.	 No	 examination,	 no	 testing	 of	 the	 physical	 body	 shows
anything,	 but	 the	 electric	 body	 starts	 showing	 it.	 First	 it	 appears	 in	 the
pranamay	kosh,	then	it	enters	the	annamay	kosh.
So	now	they	say	that	it	has	become	possible	to	treat	a	person	before	he	has
fallen	 ill.	Once	 it	 becomes	 so,	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 humanity	 to	 fall	 ill.
Before	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 you	 are	 ill,	 your	 photographs	 by	 Kirlian
methods	will	show	that	some	illness	is	going	to	happen	to	your	physical	body;
it	can	be	prevented	in	the	pranamay	kosh.
That’s	 why	 yoga	 insists	 so	 much	 on	 the	 purity	 of	 breathing,	 because	 the
pranamay	 kosh	 is	 made	 of	 a	 subtle	 energy	 that	 travels	 with	 the	 breathing,
inside	 you.	 If	 you	 breathe	 rightly,	 your	 pranamay	 kosh	 remains	 healthy	 and
whole	 and	 alive.	 Such	 a	 person	 never	 feels	 tired;	 such	 a	 person	 is	 always
available	to	do	anything.	Such	a	person	is	always	responsive,	always	ready	to
respond	 to	 the	moment,	 ready	 to	 take	 the	challenge.	He	 is	always	 ready.	You
will	 never	 find	 him	 unprepared	 for	 any	 moment.	 Not	 that	 he	 plans	 for	 the
future,	no	–	but	he	has	so	much	energy	that	whatsoever	happens	he	is	ready	to
respond.	 He	 has	 overflowing	 energy.	 Tai	 chi	 works	 on	 pranamay	 kosh.
Pranayam	works	on	pranamay	kosh.
If	you	know	just	how	to	breathe	naturally,	you	will	grow	into	your	second
body.	And	the	second	body	is	stronger	than	the	first.	And	the	second	body	lives
longer	than	the	first.
When	 somebody	 dies,	 for	 almost	 three	 days	 you	 can	 see	 his	 bioplasma.
Sometimes	 that	 is	 mistaken	 for	 his	 ghost.	 The	 physical	 body	 dies,	 but	 the
energy	 body	 continues	 to	 move.	 And	 those	 who	 have	 experimented	 deeply
about	death	say	 that	 for	 three	days	 it	 is	very	difficult	 for	 the	person	who	has
died	to	believe	that	he	has	died,	because	the	same	form	–	and	more	vital	than
ever,	 more	 healthy	 than	 ever,	 more	 beautiful	 than	 ever	 –	 surrounds	 him.	 It
depends	 on	 how	 big	 a	 bioplasma	 you	 have;	 then	 it	 can	 continue	 for	 thirteen
days	or	even	for	more.
Around	the	samadhis	of	yogis	–	in	India	we	burn	everybody’s	body	except
the	 body	 of	 one	who	has	 attained	 to	Samadhi;	we	 don’t	 burn	 his	 body	 for	 a
certain	 reason.	 Once	 you	 burn	 the	 body,	 the	 bioplasma	 starts	 moving	 away
from	the	earth.	You	can	feel	 it	 for	a	 few	days,	but	 then	 it	disappears	 into	 the
cosmos.	But	if	the	physical	body	is	left,	then	the	bioplasma	can	cling	to	it.	And
a	 man	 who	 has	 attained	 samadhi,	 who	 has	 become	 enlightened,	 if	 his
bioplasma	 can	 remain	 somewhere	 around	 his	 samadhi,	 many	 people	 will	 be
benefited	by	it.	That’s	how	many	people	come	to	see	their	gurus’	forms.
In	 the	 Aurobindo	 ashram,	 Aurobindo’s	 body	 is	 put	 in	 a	 samadhi,	 not
destroyed,	not	burned.	Many	people	have	felt	as	if	 they	have	seen	Aurobindo
around	 it.	 Or	 sometimes	 they	 have	 heard	 the	 same	 footsteps,	 the	 way
Aurobindo	used	to	walk,	and	sometimes	he	is	there	just	standing	before	them.
This	 is	 not	 Aurobindo.	 This	 is	 the	 bioplasma.	 Aurobindo	 is	 gone,	 but	 the
bioplasma,	the	pranamay	kosh,	can	persist	for	centuries.	If	the	person	has	been
really	 in	 tune	 with	 his	 pranamay	 kosh,	 it	 can	 persist.	 It	 can	 have	 its	 own
existence.
Natural	breathing	has	to	be	understood.	Watch	small	children	–	they	breathe
naturally.	That’s	why	small	children	are	so	full	of	energy;	the	parents	are	tired,
but	they	are	not	tired.
	
One	child	was	saying	to	another	child,	“I	am	so	full	of	energy	that	I	wear	out
my	shoes	within	seven	days.”
Another	said,	“That’s	nothing.	I	am	so	full	of	energy	I	wear	out	my	clothes
within	three	days.”
The	 third	said,	“That	 too	 is	nothing.	 I	am	so	 full	of	energy	 I	wear	out	my
parents	within	one	hour.”
	
In	 America	 they	 have	 done	 an	 experiment:	 one	 very	 powerful	 man	 –	 an
athletic	body	with	 tremendous	energy	–	was	 told	 to	 follow	a	 small	 child	and
imitate.	Whatsoever	the	child	does,	this	athlete	has	to	do;	just	imitate	for	eight
hours.	Within	 four	 hours	 the	 athlete	was	 gone,	 flat	 on	 the	 floor,	 because	 the
child	 enjoyed	 it	 very	 much	 and	 he	 started	 doing	 many	 things	 –	 jumping,
jogging,	shouting,	yelling.	And	the	athlete	has	 just	 to	repeat…	The	child	was
perfectly	full	of	energy	after	four	hours;	the	athlete	was	gone.	He	said,	“He	will
kill	me.	 Eight	 hours!	 Finished!	 I	 cannot	 do	 anything	more.”	He	was	 a	 great
boxer,	but	boxing	is	one	thing.	You	cannot	compete	with	a	child.
From	where	does	the	energy	come?	It	comes	from	pranamay	kosh.	A	child
breathes	 naturally,	 and	 of	 course	 breathes	 more	 prana	 in,	 more	 chi	 in	 and
accumulates	 it	 in	his	belly.	The	belly	 is	 the	accumulating	place,	 the	reservoir.
Watch	a	child;	that	is	the	right	way	to	breathe.	When	a	child	breathes,	his	chest
is	completely	unaffected.	His	belly	goes	up	and	down.	He	breathes	as	if	from
the	 belly.	All	 children	 have	 a	 little	 belly;	 that	 belly	 is	 there	 because	 of	 their
breathing	and	the	reservoir	of	energy.
That	is	the	right	way	to	breathe;	remember	not	to	use	your	chest	too	much.
Sometimes	it	can	be	used,	in	emergency	periods	–	you	are	running	to	save	your
life	–	then	the	chest	can	be	used.	It	is	an	emergency	device;	then	you	can	use
shallow,	 fast	 breathing,	 and	 run.	But	ordinarily	 the	 chest	 should	not	be	used.
And	 one	 thing	 to	 be	 remembered:	 because	 the	 chest	 is	 meant	 only	 for
emergency	 situations,	 because	 it	 is	 difficult	 in	 an	 emergency	 situation	 to
breathe	naturally	–	if	you	breathe	naturally	you	remain	so	calm	and	quiet	you
cannot	 run,	 you	 cannot	 fight,	 you	 are	 so	 calm	 and	 collected	 you	 are
buddhalike…	And	 in	 an	 emergency	 –	 the	 house	 is	 on	 fire	 –	 if	 you	 breathe
naturally,	you	will	not	be	able	to	save	anything.	Or	if	a	tiger	jumps	upon	you	in
a	forest	and	you	go	on	breathing	naturally	you	will	not	be	bothered.	You	will
say,	“Okay,	 let	him	do	whatsoever	he	wants.”	You	will	not	be	able	 to	protect
yourself.
So	nature	has	given	an	emergency	device;	the	chest	is	an	emergency	device.
When	a	tiger	attacks	you,	you	have	to	drop	natural	breathing	and	you	have	to
breathe	by	the	chest.	Then	you	will	have	more	capacity	to	run,	to	fight,	to	burn
energy	 fast.	And	 in	 an	 emergency	 situation	 there	 are	 only	 two	 alternatives	 –
flight	 or	 fight.	Both	 need	 a	 very	 shallow	 but	 intense	 energy	 –	 shallow	 but	 a
very	disturbed,	tense	state.
Now	if	you	continuously	breathe	from	the	chest,	you	will	have	tensions	in
your	 mind.	 If	 you	 continuously	 breathe	 from	 the	 chest,	 you	 will	 always	 be
afraid	 because	 the	 chest	 breathing	 is	meant	 only	 in	 fearful	 situations.	And	 if
you	have	made	it	a	habit	then	you	will	be	continuously	afraid,	tense,	always	in
flight.	The	enemy	is	not	there,	but	you	will	imagine	the	enemy	is	there;	that’s
how	paranoia	is	created.
In	 the	 West	 also,	 a	 few	 people	 have	 come	 across	 this	 phenomenon	 –
Alexander	 Lowen	 and	 other	 bioenergetic	 people	who	 have	 been	working	 on
bioenergy.	That	is	prana.	They	have	come	to	feel	that	in	people	who	are	afraid,
the	chest	is	tense	and	they	are	breathing	very	shallow	breaths.	If	their	breathing
can	be	made	deeper,	to	go	and	touch	the	belly,	the	hara	center,	then	their	fear
disappears.	 If	 their	 musculature	 can	 be	 relaxed,	 as	 is	 done	 in	 Rolfing…	 Ida
Rolf	 has	 invented	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 methods	 to	 change	 the	 inner
structure	 of	 the	 body	 because	 if	 you	 have	 been	 breathing	wrongly	 for	many
years,	you	have	developed	a	musculature,	and	that	musculature	will	be	in	 the
way	and	will	not	allow	you	 to	 rightly	breathe	or	deeply	breathe.	And	even	 if
you	 remember	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 and	 breathe	 deeply	 –	 again	 when	 you	 are
engaged	in	your	work	you	will	start	shallow-chest	breathing.	The	musculature
has	 to	be	changed.	Once	 the	musculature	 is	 changed,	 the	 fear	disappears	and
the	 tension	 disappears.	Rolfing	 is	 tremendously	 helpful;	 but	 also	working	 on
pranamay	 kosh,	 the	 second	 bioplasma	 body,	 bioenergy	 body,	 chi	 body,	 or
whatsoever	you	want	to	call	it.
Watch	a	child;	that	is	natural	breathing	and	breathe	that	way.	Let	your	belly
come	up	when	you	inhale,	let	your	belly	go	down	when	you	exhale.	And	let	it
be	in	such	a	rhythm	it	becomes	almost	a	song	in	your	energy,	a	dance	–	with
rhythm,	with	harmony	–	and	you	will	feel	so	relaxed,	so	alive,	so	vital	that	you
cannot	imagine	that	such	vitality	is	possible.
Then	is	the	third	body,	manomay	kosh	–	the	mental	body.	The	third	is	bigger
than	the	second,	subtler	than	the	second,	higher	than	the	second.	Animals	have
the	second	body	but	not	 the	 third.	Animals	are	 so	vital:	 see	a	 lion	walking	–
what	 beauty,	what	 grace,	what	 grandeur!	Man	 has	 always	 felt	 jealous.	 See	 a
deer	 running	 –	 what	 weightlessness,	 what	 energy,	 what	 a	 great	 energy
phenomenon!	Man	has	always	felt	jealous,	but	man’s	energy	is	moving	higher.
The	 third	 body	 is	manomay	 kosh,	 the	 mental	 body.	 This	 is	 bigger,	 more
spacious	 than	 the	 second.	 And	 if	 you	 don’t	 grow	 it,	 you	 will	 remain	 just	 a
possibility	 of	 man	 but	 not	 a	 real	 man.	 The	 word	 man	 comes	 from	 man,
manomay.	The	English	word	also	comes	from	the	Sanskrit	root	man.	The	Hindi
word	for	man	is	manushya;	that	too	comes	from	the	same	root	man,	the	mind.
It	 is	mind	that	makes	you	man,	but	more	or	less	you	don’t	have	it.	What	you
have	in	its	place	is	just	a	conditioned	mechanism.	You	live	by	imitation:	then
you	don’t	 have	 a	mind.	When	you	 start	 living	on	your	own	–	 spontaneous	–
when	you	start	answering	your	life	problems	on	your	own,	when	you	become
responsible,	you	start	growing	in	manomay	kosh.	Then	the	mind-body	grows.
Ordinarily	if	you	are	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	or	a	Christian	you	have	a
borrowed	mind;	it	is	not	your	mind.	Maybe	Christ	attained	to	a	great	explosion
of	 manomay	 kosh	 and	 then	 people	 have	 been	 simply	 repeating	 it.	 That
repetition	will	not	become	a	growth	in	you.	That	repetition	will	be	a	hindrance.
Don’t	repeat:	rather	try	to	understand.	Become	more	and	more	alive,	authentic,
responsive.	Even	if	there	is	a	possibility	to	go	astray,	go	astray.	Because	there	is
no	 way	 to	 grow	 if	 you	 are	 so	 afraid	 of	 committing	 errors.	 Errors	 are	 good;
mistakes	 have	 to	 be	 committed.	 Never	 commit	 the	 same	mistake	 again,	 but
never	 be	 afraid	 of	 committing	 mistakes.	 People	 who	 become	 so	 afraid	 of
committing	mistakes	 never	 grow.	They	 go	 on	 sitting	 in	 their	 place,	 afraid	 to
move.	They	are	not	alive.
The	 mind	 grows	 when	 you	 face,	 encounter,	 situations	 on	 your	 own.	 You
bring	your	own	energy	to	solve	them.	Don’t	go	asking	for	advice	forever.	Take
the	reins	of	your	life	in	your	own	hands;	that’s	what	I	mean	when	I	say	do	your
thing.	You	will	be	 in	 trouble	–	 it	 is	 safer	 to	 follow	others,	 it	 is	convenient	 to
follow	the	society,	 to	follow	the	routine,	 the	 tradition,	 the	scripture.	It	 is	very
easy	because	everybody	is	following	–	you	have	just	to	become	a	dead	part	of
the	herd,	you	have	just	to	move	with	the	crowd	wherever	it	is	going;	it	is	none
of	your	responsibility.	But	your	mental	body,	your	manomay	kosh,	will	 suffer
tremendously,	terribly;	it	will	not	grow.	You	will	not	have	your	own	mind,	and
you	will	miss	something	very,	very	beautiful	and	something	which	functions	as
a	bridge	for	higher	growth.
So	always	remember,	whatsoever	I	say	to	you,	you	can	take	it	in	two	ways.
You	can	simply	take	it	on	my	authority:	“Osho	says	so,	it	must	be	true”	–	then
you	will	 suffer,	 then	 you	will	 not	 grow.	Whatsoever	 I	 say,	 listen	 to	 it,	 try	 to
understand	 it,	 implement	 it	 in	 your	 life,	 see	 how	 it	works,	 and	 then	 come	 to
your	own	conclusions.	They	may	be	the	same,	they	may	not	be.	They	can	never
be	exactly	 the	same	because	you	have	a	different	personality,	a	unique	being.
Whatsoever	I	am	saying	is	my	own.	It	 is	bound	to	be	in	deep	ways	rooted	in
me.	You	may	come	to	similar	conclusions,	but	they	cannot	be	exactly	the	same.
So	my	 conclusions	 should	 not	 be	made	 your	 conclusions.	You	 should	 try	 to
understand	me,	you	should	try	to	learn,	but	you	should	not	collect	knowledge
from	me,	you	should	not	collect	conclusions	 from	me.	Then	your	mind-body
will	grow.
But	people	take	shortcuts.	They	say,	“If	you	have	known,	finished.	What	is
the	need	for	us	to	try	and	experiment?	We	will	believe	in	you.”	A	believer	has
no	manomay	kosh.	He	has	a	false	manomay	kosh	which	has	not	come	out	of	his
own	being	but	has	been	forced	from	without.
Then	higher	than	manomay	kosh,	bigger	than	manomay	kosh,	is	vigyanamay
kosh	–	it	is	the	intuitive	body.	It	is	very,	very	spacious.	Now	there	is	no	reason
in	 it;	 it	 goes	 beyond	 reason,	 has	 become	 very,	 very	 subtle.	 It	 is	 an	 intuitive
grasp.	It	 is	a	seeing	directly	 into	 the	nature	of	 things.	 It	 is	not	 trying	 to	 think
about	it.
The	cypress	tree	in	the	courtyard:	you	just	look	at	it.	You	don’t	think	about
it;	there	is	no	“about”	in	intuition.	You	simply	become	available,	receptive,	and
reality	 reveals	 to	you	 its	nature.	You	don’t	project.	You	are	not	 searching	 for
any	 argument,	 for	 any	 conclusion,	 nothing	 whatsoever.	 You	 are	 not	 even
searching.	You	are	simply	waiting,	and	reality	reveals	–	it	is	a	revelation.	The
intuitive	 body	 takes	 you	 to	 very	 far	 out	 horizons,	 but	 still	 there	 is	 one	 body
more.
That	is	the	fifth	body,	anandmay	kosh	–	the	bliss	body.	That	is	really	far	out!
It	is	made	of	pure	bliss.	Even	intuition	is	transcended.
These	five	seeds	are	just	seeds,	remember.	Beyond	these	five	is	your	reality.
These	 are	 just	 seeds	 surrounding	 you:	 the	 first	 is	 very	 gross;	 you	 are	 almost
confined	in	a	six-foot	body.	The	second	is	bigger	than	it,	the	third	still	bigger,
the	 fourth	 still	 bigger,	 the	 fifth	 is	 very	 big;	 but	 still	 these	 are	 seeds.	 All	 are
limited.	 If	 all	 the	 seeds	 are	dropped	 and	you	 stand	nude	 in	your	 reality,	 then
you	are	infinite.	That’s	what	yoga	says:	you	are	godly	–	aham	brahmasmi.	You
are	the	very	brahman.	Now	you	are	ultimate	reality	itself;	now	all	barriers	are
dropped.
Try	to	understand	this.	The	barriers	are	there	surrounding	you	in	circles.	The
first	barrier	is	very,	very	hard.	To	get	out	of	it	is	very	difficult.	People	remain
confined	 to	 their	 physical	 bodies	 and	 they	 think	 their	 physical	 life	 is	 all	 that
there	is	to	life.
Don’t	 settle…	 The	 physical	 body	 is	 just	 a	 step	 to	 the	 energy	 body.	 The
energy	body	is	again	just	a	step	for	the	mind	body.	That	too	in	its	own,	just	a
step	for	the	intuitive	body.	That	too,	a	step	for	the	bliss	body.	And	from	bliss
you	take	the	jump	–	now	there	are	no	more	steps	–	you	take	the	jump	into	the
abyss	of	your	being	that	is	infinity,	eternity.
These	are	five	seeds.
Corresponding	 to	 these	 five	 seeds,	 yoga	 has	 another	 doctrine	 about	 five
bhutas,	five	great	elements.	Just	as	your	body	is	made	of	food,	earth;	the	earth
is	the	first	element.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	this	earth,	remember.	The	element
simply	 says	wherever	 there	 is	matter	 it	 is	 earth;	 the	material	 is	 the	 earth,	 the
gross	is	 the	earth.	In	you	it	 is	 the	body;	outside	you	it	 is	 the	body	of	all.	The
stars	are	made	of	earth.	Everything	that	exists	is	made	of	earth.	The	first	shell	is
of	earth.	Five	bhutas	means	five	great	elements:	earth,	fire,	water,	air,	ether.
Earth	 corresponds	 to	 your	 first,	 annamay	 kosh,	 the	 food	 body.	 Fire
corresponds	to	your	second	body,	energy	body,	bioplasma,	chi,	pranamay	kosh;
it	has	the	quality	of	fire.	Third	is	water.	It	corresponds	to	the	third,	manomay
body,	the	mental	body;	it	has	the	quality	of	water.	Watch	the	mind,	how	it	goes
on	 like	 a	 flux,	 always	 moving,	 moving	 riverlike.	 The	 fourth	 is	 air,	 almost
invisible;	 you	 cannot	 see	 it	 but	 it	 is	 there.	 You	 can	 only	 feel	 it.	 That
corresponds	 to	 the	 intuitive	body,	vigyanamay	kosh.	And	 then	 there	 is	akash,
ether;	you	cannot	even	feel	it.	It	has	become	even	more	subtle	than	air.	You	can
simply	believe	it,	trust	it	that	it	is	there.	It	is	pure	space;	that	is	bliss.
But	you	are	purer	 than	pure	space,	 subtler	 than	pure	space.	Your	 reality	 is
almost	as	if	it	is	not.	That’s	why	Buddha	says	anatta	–	no-self.	Your	self	is	like
a	no-self;	your	being	is	almost	like	a	nonbeing.	Why	nonbeing?	Because	it	has
gone	so	far	away	from	all	gross	elements.	It	is	pure	is-ness.	Nothing	can	be	said
about	it,	no	description	will	be	adequate	for	it.
These	 are	 five	 bhutas,	 five	 great	 elements,	 corresponding	 to	 five	 koshs,
bodies,	within	you.
Then	 the	 third	doctrine	–	 I	would	 like	you	 to	understand	all	 these	because
they	will	be	helpful	in	understanding	the	sutras	that	we	will	be	discussing	now.
Then	 there	are	 seven	chakras.	The	word	chakra	does	not	 really	mean	center;
the	word	center	cannot	explain	 it	or	describe	 it	or	 translate	 it	 rightly	because
when	 we	 say	 “the	 center,”	 it	 seems	 something	 static.	 And	 chakra	 means
something	dynamic.	The	word	chakra	means	“the	wheel,”	 the	moving	wheel.
So	 a	 chakra	 is	 a	 dynamic	 center	 in	 your	 being,	 almost	 like	 a	 whirlpool,
whirlwind,	 the	center	of	 the	cyclone.	 It	 is	dynamic;	 it	 creates	an	energy	 field
around	it.
Seven	 chakras.	 The	 first	 is	 a	 bridge	 and	 the	 last	 is	 also	 a	 bridge;	 the
remaining	five	correspond	to	five	mahabhutas,	the	great	elements	and	the	five
seeds.	 Sex	 is	 a	 bridge,	 a	 bridge	 between	you	 and	 the	 grossest	 –	 the	prakriti,
nature.	Sahasrar,	the	seventh	chakra	is	also	a	bridge,	a	bridge	between	you	and
the	 abyss	 –	 the	 ultimate.	 These	 two	 are	 bridges.	 The	 remaining	 five	 centers
correspond	to	five	elements	and	five	bodies.
This	is	the	framework	of	Patanjali’s	system.	Remember	it	is	arbitrary.	It	has
to	 be	 used	 as	 a	 tool,	 not	 discussed	 as	 a	 dogma.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 doctrine	 in	 any
theology.	It	is	just	a	utilitarian	map.	You	go	to	some	territory,	to	some	strange
country,	 unknown,	 and	 you	 take	 a	 map	 with	 you.	 The	 map	 does	 not	 really
represent	the	territory;	how	can	the	map	represent	the	territory?	The	map	is	so
small,	the	territory	is	so	big.	On	the	map,	cities	are	just	points.	How	can	those
points	correspond	to	big	cities?	On	the	map,	roads	are	just	lines.	How	can	roads
be	 just	 lines?	Mountains	 are	 just	marked,	 rivers	 are	 just	marked	–	 and	 small
ones	are	left	out.	Only	big	ones	are	marked.	This	is	a	map;	it	is	not	a	doctrine.
There	are	not	only	five	bodies,	there	are	many	bodies	because	between	two
bodies	there	is	another	to	join	it,	and	so	on	and	so	forth.	You	are	like	an	onion,
layers	upon	layers,	but	these	five	will	do.	These	are	the	main	bodies,	the	chief
ones.	So	don’t	be	too	worried	about	it	–	because	Buddhists	say	there	are	seven
bodies,	 and	 Jainas	 say	 there	 are	 nine	 bodies.	Nothing	wrong	 and	 there	 is	 no
contradiction	 because	 these	 are	 just	 maps.	 If	 you	 are	 studying	 the	 whole
world’s	map,	 then	even	big	cities	disappear,	even	big	 rivers	disappear.	 If	you
are	studying	a	map	of	a	nation,	then	many	new	things	appear	which	were	not
on	the	world	map.	And	if	you	are	studying	the	map	of	a	province,	then	many
more	 things	 appear.	And	 if	 you	 are	 studying	 the	map	 of	 a	 district,	 of	 course
many	more.	And	if	just	of	one	city,	then	many	more,	and	if	just	of	one	house,
then	of	course	things	go	on	appearing,	it	depends.
Jainas	 say	nine.	Buddha	 says	 seven.	Patanjali	 says	 five.	There	 are	 schools
which	say	only	three.	And	they	all	are	true	because	they	are	not	discussing	any
argument,	they	are	just	giving	you	a	few	tools	to	work	with.
And	I	think	five	is	almost	perfect	because	more	than	five	is	too	much,	less
than	five	is	too	few.	Five	seems	almost	perfect,	and	Patanjali	is	a	very	balanced
thinker.
Now	a	 few	 things	 about	 these	 chakras:	The	 first	 chakra,	 the	 first	 dynamic
center,	is	sex	–	muladhar.	It	joins	you	with	nature,	it	joins	you	with	the	past,	it
joins	you	with	the	future.	You	were	born	out	of	two	persons’	sexual	play.	Your
parents’	 sexual	 play	 became	 the	 cause	 of	 your	 birth.	You	 are	 related	 to	 your
parents	 through	 the	sex	center,	and	 to	your	parents’	parents	and	so	on	and	so
forth.	You	are	related	to	the	whole	past	through	the	sex	center.	The	thread	runs
through	the	sex	center	and	if	you	give	birth	to	a	child,	you	will	be	related	to	the
future.
Jesus	insists	many	times,	in	a	very	rude	way,	“If	you	don’t	hate	your	mother
and	your	father,	you	cannot	come	and	follow	me.”	It	looks	almost	hard,	almost
unbelievable	that	a	man	like	Jesus…	Why	should	he	use	such	hard	words?	And
he	 is	 compassion	 incarnate,	 and	 he	 is	 love.	 Why	 does	 he	 say,	 “Hate	 your
mother,	hate	your	father	if	you	want	to	follow	me”?	The	meaning	is:	drop	out
of	 the	 sexual	 context.	What	 he	 is	 saying	 symbolically	 is	 go	 beyond	 the	 sex
center,	 then	 immediately	 you	 are	 no	 longer	 related	 with	 the	 past,	 no	 longer
related	with	the	future.
It	is	sex	that	makes	you	part	of	time.	Once	you	go	beyond	sex,	you	become
part	of	eternity,	not	of	time.	Then	suddenly	only	the	present	exists.	You	are	the
present	 but	 if	 you	 see	 yourself	 through	 the	 sex	 center,	 you	 are	 the	 past	 also
because	your	eyes	will	have	the	color	of	your	mother	and	your	father,	and	your
body	 will	 have	 atoms	 and	 cells	 from	 millions	 of	 generations.	 Your	 whole
structure,	biostructure,	is	part	of	a	long	continuum.	You	are	part	of	a	big	chain.
In	 India,	 they	say	your	debt	 to	your	parents	cannot	be	 fulfilled	unless	you
give	birth	 to	children.	 If	you	want	 that	your	debt	 should	be	 fulfilled	with	 the
past,	you	have	to	create	the	future.	If	you	really	want	to	repay,	there	is	no	other
way.	Your	mother	 loved	 you,	 your	 father	 loved	 you	 –	what	 can	 you	 do	 now
they	are	gone?	You	can	become	a	mother,	a	father	 to	children	and	repay	it	 to
nature	–	to	the	same	reservoir	from	where	your	parents	came,	you	came,	your
children	will	come.
Sex	is	the	great	chain.	It	is	the	whole	chain	of	the	world,	samsara,	and	it	is
the	 link	with	others.	Have	you	watched	 it?	The	moment	you	 feel	 sexual	you
start	thinking	of	the	other;	when	you	are	not	feeling	sexual	you	never	think	of
the	 other.	A	person	who	 is	 beyond	 sex	 is	 beyond	others.	He	may	 live	 in	 the
society,	but	he	 is	not	 in	 the	society.	He	may	be	walking	 in	 the	crowd,	but	he
walks	 alone.	And	a	man	who	 is	 sexual	may	be	 sitting	on	 the	 top	of	Everest,
alone,	but	he	will	think	of	the	other.	He	may	be	sent	to	the	moon	to	meditate,
but	he	will	meditate	about	the	other.
Sex	is	the	bridge	with	the	others.	Once	sex	disappears	the	chain	is	broken.
For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 become	 an	 individual.	 That’s	why	 people	may	 be	 too
obsessed	with	sex,	but	they	are	never	happy	with	it	because	it	is	double-edged.
It	links	you	with	others,	it	does	not	allow	you	to	be	individual.	It	does	not	allow
you	to	be	yourself.	It	forces	you	into	patterns,	into	slaveries,	bondages.	But	if
you	don’t	know	how	to	transcend	it,	that’s	the	only	way	to	use	your	energy	–	it
becomes	a	safety	valve.
People	who	 live	 at	 the	 first	 center,	muladhar,	 live	 only	 for	 a	 very	 foolish
reason.	 They	 go	 on	 creating	 energy	 and	 then	 they	 are	 too	 burdened	with	 it.
Then	 they	 go	 on	 throwing	 it	 away.	They	 eat,	 they	work,	 they	 sleep,	 they	 do
many	 things	 to	 create	 energy.	Then	 they	 say,	 “What	 to	 do	with	 it?	 It	 is	 very
heavy.”	Then	they	throw	it	–	seems	a	very	vicious	circle!	When	they	throw	it
away,	they	again	feel	empty.	They	fill	with	new	fuel,	with	new	food,	with	new
work,	and	again	when	the	energy	is	there	they	are	“feeling	too	full,”	they	say.
Somewhere	 it	 has	 to	 be	 released.	And	 sex	 becomes	 just	 a	 release:	 a	 vicious
circle	of	accumulating	energy,	throwing	energy,	accumulating	energy,	throwing
energy.	It	looks	almost	absurd.
Unless	you	know	that	there	are	higher	centers	within	you	that	can	take	that
energy	 –	 use	 it	 in	 a	 creative	 way	 –	 you	 will	 remain	 confined	 to	 the	 sexual
vicious	circle.	That’s	why	all	the	religions	insist	on	some	sort	of	sexual	control.
It	 can	 become	 repressive,	 it	 can	 become	 dangerous.	 If	 new	 centers	 are	 not
opening	and	you	go	on	damming	energy,	condemning,	forcing,	repressing,	then
you	 are	 on	 a	 volcano.	Any	day	 you	will	 explode;	 you	will	 become	neurotic.
You	are	going	 to	be	mad.	Then	 it	 is	better	 to	 relieve	 it.	But	 there	are	centers
which	can	absorb	the	energy,	and	greater	being	and	greater	possibilities	can	be
revealed	to	you.
Remember,	we	have	been	saying	in	the	past	few	days	that	the	second	center,
near	the	sex	center,	is	the	hara,	the	center	of	death.	That’s	why	people	are	afraid
to	 move	 beyond	 sex	 because	 the	 moment	 the	 energy	 moves	 beyond	 sex	 it
touches	 the	hara	 center	 and	one	becomes	 afraid.	That’s	why	people	 are	 even
afraid	to	move	deeply	in	love	because	when	you	move	deeply	into	love,	the	sex
center	creates	such	ripples	that	the	ripples	enter	the	hara	center	and	fear	arises.
So	many	people	come	to	me	and	they	say,	“Why	do	we	feel	so	afraid	of	the
other	sex?”	–	of	men	or	women	–	“Why	do	we	feel	so	afraid?”	It	is	not	the	fear
of	 the	other	sex,	 it	 is	 the	fear	of	sex	 itself	because	 if	you	go	deeply	 into	sex,
then	the	center	becomes	more	dynamic,	creates	bigger	energy	fields	and	those
energy	 fields	 start	 overlapping	with	 the	hara	 center.	Have	you	watched?	 In	 a
sexual	orgasm	something	starts	moving	just	below	your	navel,	throbbing.	That
throb	 is	 the	 overlapping	 of	 the	 sex	 center	 with	 the	 hara.	 That’s	 why	 people
become	afraid	of	sex	also.	Particularly	people	become	afraid	of	deep	intimacy,
of	orgasm	itself.
But	 that	 second	 center	 has	 to	 be	 entered,	 penetrated,	 opened.	 That’s	 the
meaning	when	Jesus	says	unless	you	are	ready	to	die,	you	cannot	be	reborn.
Just	a	 few	days	ago,	on	Easter,	 somebody	has	asked	a	question,	“Today	 is
Easter,	have	you	something	to	say?”	I	have	only	one	thing	to	say,	that	each	day
is	Easter	because	Easter	is	the	day	of	Jesus’	resurrection	–	his	crucifixion	and
resurrection,	his	death	and	his	being	 reborn.	Each	day	 is	an	Easter	 if	you	are
ready	 to	move	 into	 the	 hara	 center.	You	will	 be	 crucified	 first	 –	 the	 cross	 is
there	 within	 your	 hara	 center.	 You	 are	 already	 carrying	 it;	 you	 just	 have	 to
move	to	it	and	you	have	to	die	through	it,	and	then	there	is	resurrection.
Once	you	die	in	the	hara	center,	death	disappears;	then	for	the	first	time	you
become	aware	of	a	new	world,	a	new	dimension.	Then	you	can	see	the	center
higher	than	the	hara;	that	is	the	navel	center.	And	the	navel	center	becomes	the
resurrection	 because	 it	 is	 the	 most	 energy-conserving	 center.	 It	 is	 the	 very
reservoir	of	energy.
And	once	you	know	that	you	have	moved	from	the	sex	center	 to	 the	hara,
now	you	know	that	there	is	a	possibility	of	moving	inward.	You	have	opened
one	door.	Now	you	cannot	rest	unless	you	have	opened	all	the	doors.	Now	you
cannot	remain	on	the	porch;	you	have	entered	the	palace.	Then	you	can	open
another	door	and	another	door…
Just	in	the	middle	is	the	heart	center.	The	heart	center	divides	the	lower	and
the	higher.	First	is	the	sex	center,	then	the	hara,	then	the	navel,	and	then	comes
the	heart	center.	Three	centers	are	below	it,	three	centers	are	above	it:	The	heart
is	exactly	in	the	middle.
You	must	have	 seen	Solomon’s	 seal.	 In	 Judaism,	particularly	 in	Cabalistic
thinking,	Solomon’s	seal	is	one	of	the	most	important	symbols.	That	Solomon’s
seal	 is	 the	 symbol	of	 the	heart	center.	Sex	moves	downward,	 so	 sex	 is	 like	a
triangle	pointed	downward.	Sahasrar	moves	upward,	so	sahasrar	is	a	triangle
moving	upward,	pointed	upward.	And	the	heart	is	just	in	the	middle,	where	the
sex	 triangle	 comes	 to	meet	 the	 sahasrar	 triangle.	Both	 triangles	meet,	merge
into	each	other,	and	it	becomes	a	six-pointed	star,	that	is	the	seal	of	Solomon.
The	heart	is	the	seal	of	Solomon.
Once	 you	 have	 opened	 the	 heart,	 then	 you	 are	 available	 for	 the	 highest
possibilities.	 Below	 the	 heart	 you	 remain	 man;	 beyond	 the	 heart	 you	 have
become	superman.
After	 the	heart	 center	 there	 is	 the	 throat	 center,	 then	 there	 is	 the	 third-eye
center,	and	then	sahasrar.
The	heart	 is	 feeling	 love.	The	heart	 is	absorbing	love,	becoming	love.	The
throat	 is	 expression,	 communication,	 sharing,	 giving	 it	 to	 others.	And	 if	 you
give	love	to	others,	then	the	third-eye	center	starts	functioning.	Once	you	start
giving,	you	go	higher	and	higher.	A	person	who	goes	on	taking	goes	lower	and
lower	 and	 lower.	 A	 person	 who	 goes	 on	 giving	 goes	 higher	 and	 higher	 and
higher.	A	miser	is	the	worst	possibility	a	man	can	fall	into,	and	a	sharer	is	the
greatest	possibility	that	a	man	can	become	available	to.
Five	bodies,	five	mahabhutas,	and	five	centers,	plus	two	bridges;	this	is	the
framework,	the	map.	Behind	this	framework	is	the	whole	effort	of	the	yogi,	of
bringing	samyama	to	every	nook	and	corner,	so	one	becomes	enlightened,	full
of	light.
Now	the	sutras	of	Patanjali	–	he	says:
The	power	of	contacting	the	state	of	consciousness
which	is	outside	the	mental	body,	manomay	sharir,
and	therefore	inconceivable
is	called	mahavideha.
Through	this	power
the	covering	of	the	light	is	destroyed.
Once	you	are	beyond	 the	mind-body,	 for	 the	 first	 time	you	become	aware
that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 mind	 but	 the	 witness.	 Below	 the	 mind	 you	 remain
identified	with	it.	Once	you	know	that	thoughts,	mental	images,	ideas,	are	just
objects,	 floating	 clouds	 in	 your	 consciousness	 –	 you	 are	 separate	 from	 them
immediately.
The	 power	 of	 contacting	 the	 state	 of	 consciousness	 which	 is	 outside	 the
mental	 body	 and	 therefore	 inconceivable	 is	 called	mahavideha.	 You	 become
beyond	 body.	Mahavideha	 means	 one	 who	 is	 beyond	 body,	 one	 who	 is	 no
longer	confined	to	any	body,	one	who	knows	that	he	is	not	the	body,	gross	or
subtle,	 one	 who	 knows	 that	 he	 is	 infinite,	 with	 no	 boundaries.	Mahavideha
means	one	who	has	come	to	feel	that	he	has	no	boundaries.	All	boundaries	are
confinements,	 imprisonments;	and	he	can	break	 them,	drop	 them,	and	he	can
become	one	with	the	infinite	sky.
This	moment	of	realizing	oneself	as	the	infinite	is	the	moment:	through	this
power	 the	 covering	 of	 the	 light	 is	 destroyed.	 Then	 the	 covering	 is	 dropped
which	has	been	hiding	your	 light.	You	are	 like	a	 light	which	 is	being	hidden
under	covers	and	covers,	by	and	by	each	and	every	cover	has	to	be	taken	away;
more	light	will	penetrate	out	of	it.
Manomay	kosh,	the	mental	body,	once	dropped	you	become	meditation,	you
become	a	no-mind.	All	our	effort	here	is	how	to	go	beyond	the	manomay	kosh
–	how	to	become	aware:	“I	am	not	the	thinking	process.”
Performing	samyama	on	their	gross,	constant,
subtle,	all-pervading,	and	functional	state
brings	mastery	over	the	panchabhutas	–
the	five	elements.
This	is	one	of	the	most	potential	sutras	of	Patanjali,	and	very	significant	for
future	science.	One	day	or	other,	science	 is	going	 to	discover	 the	meaning	of
this	sutra.
Science	is	already	on	the	path	toward	it.	This	sutra	says	that	all	the	elements
in	the	world,	the	pancha	mahabhutas	–	earth,	air,	fire,	etcetera	–	they	come	out
of	nothing,	and	they	go	again	into	nothingness	to	rest.	Everything	comes	out	of
nothing	and	when	tired,	goes	back	and	rests	into	nothingness.
Now	science,	particularly	physicists,	agree	with	it:	that	matter	has	come	out
of	 nothing.	 The	 deeper	 they	 have	 gone	 into	 matter,	 the	 more	 they	 have
discovered	 that	 there	 is	nothing	 like	 the	material.	The	deeper	 they	go,	matter
becomes	more	and	more	elusive	and	finally	it	slips	out	of	their	fingers.	Nothing
remains,	just	emptiness,	just	pure	space.	Out	of	pure	space	everything	is	born.
Looks	very	 illogical	 –	but	 life	 is	 illogical.	The	whole	of	modern	 science	has
become	 illogical	 because	 if	 you	 persist	 in	 your	 logic,	 you	 cannot	move	 into
reality.	 If	you	move	 into	 reality	you	have	 to	drop	 logic.	And	of	course	when
there	 is	 a	 choice	 between	 logic	 and	 reality,	 how	 can	 you	 choose	 logic?	You
have	to	drop	logic.
Just	fifty	years	ago,	scientists	came	to	realize	that	quanta,	electric	particles,
behave	 in	 a	 very	 ridiculous	 way,	 behave	 like	 a	 Zen	 master	 –	 unbelievable,
absurd	 –	 sometimes	 they	 look	 like	 waves	 and	 sometimes	 they	 look	 like
particles.	Now	before	 that	 it	was	a	 tacit	understanding	 that	 something	can	be
either	 a	particle	or	 a	wave.	One	and	 the	 same	 thing	cannot	be	both	 together,
simultaneously.	A	particle	and	a	wave?	It	means	something	can	be	a	point	and	a
line	together,	at	the	same	time.	Impossible!	Euclid	will	not	agree.	Aristotle	will
simply	deny	–	you	have	gone	mad.	A	point	is	a	point,	and	a	line	is	many	points
in	 a	 row,	 so	 how	 can	 one	 point	 be	 a	 line	 also	 at	 the	 same	 time	 remaining	 a
point?	Looks	absurd	–	and	Euclid	and	Aristotle	prevailed.
Just	fifty	years	before,	their	whole	edifice	collapsed	because	scientists	came
to	 know	 that	 the	 quantum,	 the	 electric	 particle,	 behaves	 in	 both	 ways
simultaneously.
Logicians	raised	arguments,	and	they	said,	“This	is	not	possible.”	Physicists
said,	“What	can	we	do?	It	is	not	a	question	of	possibility	or	impossibility.	It	is
so!	We	 cannot	 do	 anything.	 If	 the	 quantum	 is	 not	 going	 to	 follow	Aristotle,
what	can	we	do?	And	if	the	quantum	behaves	in	a	non-Euclidean	way	and	does
not	 follow	the	geometry	of	Euclid,	what	can	we	do?	We	have	 to	 listen	 to	 the
behavior	of	the	real	and	the	reality.”
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 very	 critical	 moments	 in	 the	 history	 of	 human
consciousness.	It	has	always	been	believed	that	something	can	come	only	out
of	something.	Simple	and	natural,	obviously	so.	How	can	something	come	out
of	nothing?	Then	matter	disappeared,	and	 the	scientists	have	 to	conclude	 that
everything	 is	 born	 out	 of	 nothing,	 and	 everything	 disappears	 again	 into
nothing.	 Now	 they	 are	 talking	 about	 black	 holes.	 Black	 holes	 are	 holes	 of
tremendous	 nothingness.	 I	 have	 to	 call	 it	 “tremendous	 nothingness”	 because
that	nothingness	is	not	just	an	absence.	It	is	full	of	energy,	but	the	energy	is	of
nothingness.	There	is	nothing	to	find,	but	there	is	energy.
Now	they	say	there	exist	black	holes	in	existence.	They	are	parallel	to	stars
–	stars	are	positive,	and	parallel	to	each	star	there	is	a	black	hole.	The	star	is;
the	black	hole	is	not.	Each	star	when	burned,	exhausted,	becomes	a	black	hole.
And	each	black	hole,	when	rested,	becomes	a	star.
Matter,	 no-matter	 go	 on	 changing.	 Matter	 becomes	 no-matter;	 no-matter
becomes	matter.	Life	becomes	death;	death	becomes	life.	Love	becomes	hate;
hate	becomes	love.	Polarities	continuously	change.
This	 sutra	 says,	Performing	 samyama	on	 their	gross,	 constant,	 subtle,	 all-
pervading,	and	functional	state	brings	mastery	over	the	panchabhutas	–	the	five
elements.	 Patanjali	 is	 saying	 that	 if	 you	 have	 come	 to	 understand	 your	 true
nature	of	witnessing,	and	then	if	you	concentrate	–	you	bring	samyama	on	any
matter	 –	 you	 can	 make	 it	 appear	 or	 disappear.	 You	 can	 help	 things	 to
materialize	because	they	come	out	of	nothingness.	And	you	can	help	things	to
dematerialize.
Now,	that	yet	remains	to	be	seen	by	physicists,	whether	it	is	possible	or	not.
It	is	happening	that	matter	changes	and	becomes	no-matter,	no-matter	changes,
becomes	matter.	They	have	come	to	feel	many	absurd	things	these	fifty	years.
It	is	one	of	the	most	potential	ages	ever,	where	so	many	things	have	exploded
that	it	has	become	almost	impossible	to	confine	them	in	a	system.	How	to	make
a	 system?	 It	 was	 very	 easy	 just	 fifty	 years	 earlier	 to	 create	 a	 self-contained
system	and	now	it	 is	 impossible.	Reality	has	poked	its	nose	from	everywhere
and	destroyed	all	doctrinaires,	systems,	dogmas.	Reality	has	proved	to	be	 too
much.
Scientists	say	it	is	happening.	Patanjali	says	it	can	be	made	to	happen.	If	it	is
happening,	then	why	can	it	not	be	made	to	happen?	Just	watch.	You	heat	water;
at	a	hundred	degrees	 it	becomes	vapor.	 It	has	always	been	happening,	before
fire	was	ever	discovered.	The	sun	 rays	were	evaporating	water	 from	 the	seas
and	rivers,	and	clouds	were	forming	and	water	was	coming	back	again	into	the
rivers,	again	evaporating.	Then	man	discovered	fire,	and	then	he	started	heating
water,	evaporating	it.
Whatever	is	happening,	ways	and	means	can	be	found	to	make	it	happen.	If
it	is	already	happening	then	it	is	not	against	reality,	then	you	have	just	to	know
how	 to	 make	 it	 happen.	 If	 matter	 becomes	 no-matter,	 no-matter	 becomes
matter,	if	things	change	polarities,	things	disappear	into	nothingness	and	things
appear	out	of	nothingness	–	 if	 this	 is	already	happening	–	 then	Patanjali	says
ways	and	means	can	be	found	 through	which	 it	can	be	made	 to	happen.	And
this	he	says	is	the	way:	if	you	have	come	to	recognize	your	being,	beyond	the
five	 seeds,	 you	 become	 capable	 of	 materializing	 things	 or	 dematerializing
things.
It	still	remains	for	the	scientific	workers	to	find	out	whether	it	is	possible	or
not,	but	it	seems	plausible.	There	seems	to	be	no	logical	problem	in	it.
From	this	follows	the	attainment	of	anima,	etcetera,
Perfection	of	the	body,	and
the	removal	of	the	elements’	power	to	obstruct	the	body.
And	then	come	the	eight	siddhis,	eight	powers	of	yogis.	The	first	is	anima,
and	 then	 there	 is	 laghima	and	garima,	etcetera.	The	eight	powers	of	 the	yogi
are	 that	 they	 can	make	 their	 body	disappear,	 or	 they	 can	make	 their	 body	 so
small,	so	small	that	it	becomes	almost	invisible,	or	they	can	make	their	bodies
so	big,	as	big	as	they	want.	It	is	under	their	control	to	make	the	body	small,	big,
or	disappear	completely,	or	to	appear	in	many	places	simultaneously.
Looks	 impossible,	 but	 things	 that	 look	 impossible	 by	 and	 by	 become
possible.	It	was	impossible	for	man	to	fly;	nobody	ever	believed	–	the	Wright
brothers	 were	 thought	 to	 be	 mad,	 insane.	 When	 they	 invented	 their	 first
airplane,	they	were	so	afraid	to	tell	people	–	that	if	people	come	to	know,	they
would	 be	 caught	 and	 hospitalized.	 The	 first	 flight	 was	 done	 completely
unknown	 to	 anybody,	 just	 these	 two	 brothers.	 And	 they	 invented	 their	 first
airplane	hiding	in	a	basement,	so	nobody	came	to	know	what	they	were	doing.
Everybody	 had	 believed	 that	 they	 had	 gone	 completely	mad	 –	who	 has	 ever
flown?	Their	first	air	flight	was	of	sixty	seconds	only	–	only	of	sixty	seconds	–
but	 it	 changed	 the	whole	 of	 history	 tremendously,	 the	whole	 of	 humanity.	 It
became	possible.
Nobody	had	ever	thought	that	the	atom	could	be	split.	It	was	split,	and	now
man	can	never	be	the	same	again.
Many	 things	have	happened	which	were	 always	 thought	 to	be	 impossible.
We	 have	 reached	 the	 moon;	 it	 was	 the	 symbol	 of	 impossibility.	 In	 all	 the
languages	of	the	world	there	are	expressions	like,	“Don’t	long	for	the	moon.”
That	 means	 don’t	 long	 for	 the	 impossible.	 Now	 we	 have	 to	 change	 those
expressions.	And	in	fact,	once	we	have	reached	the	moon,	now	nothing	debars
the	path.	Now	everything	has	become	available;	it	is	only	a	question	of	time.
Einstein	has	said	that	if	we	can	invent	a	vehicle	which	moves	with	the	speed
of	light,	then	a	person	can	go	on	traveling	and	he	will	never	age.	If	he	goes	on	a
spaceship	 that	moves	with	 the	speed	of	 light	when	he	 is	 thirty	years	old,	and
comes	back	after	 thirty	years,	he	will	remain	thirty	years	old.	His	friends	and
brothers	will	 be	 sixty	 years	 old,	 a	 few	of	 them	will	 be	 already	dead,	 but	 the
person	will	 remain	 thirty	 years	 old.	What	 nonsense	 are	 you	 saying?	Einstein
says	time	and	its	effect	disappear	when	one	is	moving	with	the	speed	of	light.
A	man	can	go	on	 infinite	 space	 travel	 and	can	come	back	after	 five	hundred
years.	All	the	people	here	will	be	gone,	nobody	will	recognize	him	and	he	will
not	recognize	anybody,	but	he	will	remain	the	same	age.	You	are	aging	because
of	 the	 speed	 of	 the	 earth.	 If	 the	 speed	 is	 as	 much	 as	 light,	 which	 is	 really
tremendous,	then	you	will	not	age	at	all.
Patanjali	says	that	if	you	have	moved	beyond	all	 the	five	bodies,	you	have
gone	 beyond	 all	 five	 elements.	 Now	 you	 are	 in	 a	 state	 from	where	 you	 can
control	anything	you	wish.	Just	by	the	idea	that	you	want	to	become	small,	you
will	 become	 small;	 if	 you	want	 to	 become	 big,	 you	will	 become	 big;	 if	 you
want	to	disappear,	you	can	disappear.
It	is	not	necessarily	that	yogis	should	do	it.	Buddhas	have	never	been	known
to	do	it.	Patanjali	himself	has	not	been	known	to	do	it.	What	Patanjali	is	saying
–	he	is	revealing	all	the	possibilities.
In	fact,	a	man	who	has	attained	his	uttermost	being,	for	what	will	he	think	to
become	small?	For	what?	He	can’t	be	so	foolish.	For	what?	For	what	would	he
like	 to	become	 like	an	elephant?	What	 is	 the	point	 in	 it?	And	why	should	he
want	to	disappear?	He	cannot	be	interested	in	amusing	people,	their	curiosities.
He	is	not	a	magician.	He	is	not	interested	in	people	applauding	him.	For	what?
In	fact,	the	moment	a	person	reaches	the	highest	peak	of	his	being,	all	desires
disappear.	Siddhis	appear	when	desires	disappear.	This	is	the	dilemma:	powers
come	 when	 you	 don’t	 want	 to	 use	 them.	 In	 fact,	 they	 come	 only	 when	 the
person	has	disappeared	who	always	wanted	to	have	them.
This	part	of	Patanjali’s	Yoga	Sutras	 is	 to	make	you	aware	 that	 these	 things
become	possible	but	 they	are	never	actualized	because	the	person	who	would
want	 it,	 who	 would	 have	 always	 liked	 to	 go	 on	 an	 ego	 trip	 through	 these
powers,	is	no	longer	there.	Miraculous	powers	happen	to	you	when	you	are	not
interested	in	them.	This	is	the	economy	of	existence.	If	you	desire,	you	remain
impotent.	If	you	don’t	desire,	you	become	infinitely	potent.	This	I	call	the	law
of	banking:	if	you	don’t	have	money,	no	bank	is	going	to	give	you	any;	if	you
have	money,	every	bank	is	ready	to	give	you	more.	When	you	don’t	need,	all	is
available;	when	you	are	needy,	nothing	is	available.
Beauty,	grace,	strength,	and	adamantine	hardness
constitute	the	perfect	body.
Patanjali	is	not	talking	about	this	body.	This	body	can	be	beautiful,	but	can
never	be	perfectly	beautiful.	The	second	body	can	be	more	beautiful	than	this,
the	third	even	more,	because	they	are	moving	closer	to	the	center.	The	beauty	is
of	 the	 center.	The	 farther	 away	 it	 has	 to	 travel,	 the	more	 limited	 it	 becomes.
The	fourth	body	is	even	more	beautiful.	The	fifth	is	almost	ninety-nine	percent
perfect.
But	that	which	is	your	being	–	the	real	you	–	is	beauty,	grace,	strength,	and
adamantine	 hardness.	 It	 is	 adamantine	 hardness	 and	 at	 the	 same	 time	 the
softness	of	a	lotus.	It	 is	beautiful	but	not	fragile	–	strong.	It	 is	strong,	but	not
just	hard	–	all	opposites	meet	in	it,	as	if	a	lotus	flower	is	made	of	diamonds	or	a
diamond	 is	made	 of	 lotus	 flowers;	 because	man	 and	woman	meet	 there	 and
transcend,	because	sun	and	moon	meet	there	and	transcend.
The	old	term	for	yoga	is	hatha.	This	word	hatha	is	very,	very	significant.	Ha
means	sun,	tha	means	moon;	and	hatha	means	the	meeting	of	the	sun	and	the
moon.	The	union	of	sun	and	moon	is	yoga	–	unio	mystica.
In	the	human	body,	according	to	the	hatha	yogis,	there	are	three	channels	of
energy.	One	is	known	as	pingala;	that	is	the	right	channel,	connected	with	the
left	brain	–	the	sun	channel.	Then	there	is	another	channel	ida;	the	left	channel,
connected	with	the	right	brain	–	the	moon	channel.	And	then	there	is	the	third
channel,	 the	middle	channel,	sushumna;	 the	central,	 the	balanced	–	it	 is	made
of	the	sun	and	the	moon	together.
Ordinarily	your	energy	moves	either	by	the	pingala	or	by	ida.	Yogis’	energy
starts	moving	through	the	sushumna.	That	is	called	kundalini,	when	the	energy
moves	 just	 between	 these	 two,	 right	 and	 left.	 These	 channels	 exist
corresponding	 to	 your	 backbone.	 Once	 the	 energy	 moves	 in	 the	 middle
channel,	you	become	balanced.	Then	a	person	is	neither	a	man	nor	a	woman,
neither	 hard	 nor	 soft;	 or	 both	 –	 man	 and	 woman,	 hard	 and	 soft.	 All	 the
polarities	disappear	in	sushumna;	and	sahasrar	is	the	peak	of	sushumna.
If	 you	 live	 on	 the	 lowest	 point	 of	 your	 being,	 that	 is	muladhar,	 the	 sex
center,	then	either	you	move	by	ida	or	you	move	by	pingala,	the	sun	channel	or
the	moon	channel;	and	you	remain	divided.	And	you	go	on	seeking	the	other,
you	go	on	asking	for	the	other	–	you	feel	incomplete	in	yourself,	you	have	to
depend	on	the	other.
Once	 your	 own	 energies	 meet	 inside,	 a	 great	 orgasm	 happens,	 a	 cosmic
orgasm	 –	 when	 the	 ida	 and	 pingala	 dissolve	 into	 sushumna	 –	 then	 one	 is
thrilled,	eternally	thrilled.	Then	one	is	ecstatic,	continuously	ecstatic;	then	that
ecstasy	 knows	 no	 end.	 Then	 one	 never	 comes	 down,	 then	 one	 never	 comes
low;	one	remains	high.	That	point	of	highness	becomes	one’s	innermost	core,
one’s	very	being.
Remember	again,	I	would	like	to	say	to	you:	this	is	the	framework.	We	are
not	talking	about	actual	things.	There	are	foolish	people	who	have	even	tried	to
dissect	 the	 human	 body	 to	 see	 where	 ida	 is	 and	 pingala	 is,	 and,	 “Where	 is
sushumna?”	 They	 have	 found	 them	 nowhere.	 These	 are	 just	 indicators,
symbolic.
There	 are	 foolish	 people	 who	 have	 tried	 to	 dissect	 the	 body	 and	 to	 find
where	 the	 centers	 are.	 One	 doctor	 has	 even	 written	 a	 book	 to	 prove	 which
center	is	exactly	which	complex	in	the	body	according	to	physiologists.	These
are	all	foolish	attempts.
Yoga	is	not	in	that	way	scientific.	It	is	allegorical.	It	is	a	great	allegory.	It	is
showing	something	and	if	you	go	inside	you	will	find	it,	but	there	is	no	way	to
find	 it	 by	 dissecting	 a	 body.	 By	 postmortem	 you	 will	 not	 find	 these	 things.
These	are	alive	phenomena.	And	these	words	are	simply	indicative	–	don’t	be
confined	to	them,	and	don’t	make	a	fixed	obsession	and	doctrine	out	of	them.
Remain	fluid.	Take	the	hint,	and	go	on	the	journey.
One	more	word;	 it	 is	urdhvaretas.	 It	means	 the	upward	 journey	of	 energy.
Right	now	you	are	existing	at	 the	sex	center,	and	from	that	center	 the	energy
goes	 on	 falling	 downward.	 Urdhvaretas	 means	 your	 energy	 starts	 moving
upward.	A	delicate,	very	delicate	phenomenon,	and	one	has	to	be	very	alert	to
work	with	 it.	 If	you	are	not	alert	 there	 is	every	possibility	you	will	become	a
perverted	being.	It	is	dangerous;	that’s	why	yogis	call	it	“serpent	power.”	It	is
dangerous.	It	is	like	a	snake	–	you	are	playing	with	a	snake.	If	you	don’t	know
how	to,	what	to	do,	there	is	danger	–	you	are	playing	with	poison.
And	many	people	have	become	perverted	because	they	tried	to	repress	their
sex	 energy	 in	 order	 to	 become	 urdhvaretas,	 to	 go	 upward.	 They	 never	went
upward.	They	even	became	more	perverted	than	normal	people.
That’s	why	a	master	is	needed	–	one	who	knows	where	you	are,	where	you
are	going,	and	what	is	going	to	happen	next;	one	who	can	see	your	future	and
one	who	can	see	whether	the	right	channeling	is	happening	or	not.	Otherwise
the	whole	world	is	in	a	mess	of	sexual	perversion.
Never	repress.	It	is	better	to	be	normal	and	natural	than	to	be	perverted.	But
just	to	be	normal	is	not	enough,	much	more	is	possible:	Transform.	Repression
is	not	the	way	of	urdhvaretas	–	transformation	is.	And	that	can	be	done	only	if
you	purify	your	body,	you	purify	your	mind;	you	throw	away	all	rubbish	that
you	 have	 gathered	 in	 the	 body	 and	 the	 mind.	 Only	 with	 a	 purity,	 light,
weightlessness,	will	you	be	able	to	help	the	energy	to	move	upward.
Ordinarily	 it	 is	 like	 a	 coiled	 snake;	 that’s	 why	 we	 call	 it	 kundalini,	 or
kundali.	 Kundali	 means	 “coiled	 up.”	 When	 it	 raises	 its	 head	 and	 moves
upward,	tremendous	is	the	experience.	Whenever	it	passes	a	higher	center,	you
will	 have	higher	 and	higher	 experiences.	At	 each	 center	many	 things	will	 be
revealed	to	you;	you	are	a	great	book.	But	the	energy	has	to	pass	through	the
centers;	only	then	can	those	centers	reveal	to	you	their	beauties,	their	visions,
their	poetries,	 their	songs,	 their	dances.	And	each	center	has	a	higher	orgasm
than	the	lower	one.
Sexual	orgasm	is	the	lowest.	Higher	is	the	orgasm	of	the	hara.	Then	higher
than	that	is	the	orgasm	of	the	nabhi,	the	navel.	Then	higher	than	that	is	that	of
love	–	the	heart.	Then	higher	than	that	is	that	of	the	throat	–	creativity,	sharing.
Then	higher	 than	 that	 is	 that	of	 the	 third	eye,	 the	vision	of	 life	as	really	 it	 is,
without	any	projections	–	 the	clarity	 to	see	unclouded.	And	highest	 is	 that	of
the	sahasrar,	the	seventh	center.
This	 is	 the	map.	 If	you	want,	you	can	move	upward,	become	urdhvaretas.
But	never	try	to	become	urdhvaretas	for	siddhis,	powers	–	they	are	all	foolish.
Try	to	become	urdhvaretas	to	know	who	you	are,	not	for	power	but	peace.	Let
peace	be	thy	goal,	never	power.
Patanjali	called	this	chapter	Vibhuti	Pada;	vibhuti	means	“power.”	included
this	chapter	so	that	his	disciples	and	those	who	will	be	following	him	are	made
alert	that	many	powers	happen	on	the	way	but	you	are	not	to	get	entangled	with
them.	Once	you	become	entangled	with	power,	once	you	are	on	a	power	trip,
you	are	in	trouble.	You	will	be	tied	down	to	that	spot	–	and	your	flight	will	be
stopped.	And	 one	 has	 to	 go	 on	 flying	 and	 flying	 till	 the	 very	 end,	when	 the
abyss	opens	and	you	are	absorbed	back	into	the	cosmic	soul.
Let	peace	be	thy	goal.
	
Chapter	10:	Tantra	and	the	World	of	the	Chakras
	
Tantra	is	freedom	–	freedom	from	all	mind	constructs,	from	all	mind	games;
freedom	 from	all	 structures,	 freedom	 from	 the	 other.	Tantra	 is	 a	 space	 to	 be.
Tantra	is	liberation.
Tantra	is	not	a	religion	in	the	ordinary	sense.	Religion	is	again	a	mind	game,
religion	gives	you	a	certain	pattern.	A	Christian	has	a	certain	pattern,	so	has	a
Hindu,	so	has	a	Muslim.	Religion	gives	you	a	certain	style,	a	discipline.	Tantra
takes	all	disciplines	away.
When	 there	 is	 no	 discipline,	 when	 there	 is	 no	 enforced	 order,	 a	 totally
different	 kind	 of	 order	 arises	 in	 you.	What	Lao	Tzu	 calls	 Tao,	what	Buddha
calls	dhamma,arises	 in	 you.	This	 is	 not	 anything	 done	 by	 you;	 it	 happens	 to
you.	Tantra	simply	creates	a	space	for	 it	 to	happen.	It	does	not	even	invite,	 it
does	not	wait;	it	simply	creates	a	space.	And	when	the	space	is	ready,	the	whole
flows	in.
I	have	heard	a	very	beautiful	story,	a	very	ancient	one…
	
In	a	province,	no	rain	had	fallen	for	a	long	time	–	everything	was	dried	up.
At	last	the	citizens	decided	to	fetch	the	rainmaker.	A	deputation	was	sent	to	see
him	in	the	distant	town	where	he	lived,	with	an	urgent	request	to	come	as	soon
as	possible	and	make	rain	for	their	parched	fields.
The	rainmaker,	a	wise	old	man,	promised	to	do	so,	on	condition	that	he	was
provided	 with	 a	 solitary	 little	 cottage	 in	 the	 open	 country	 where	 he	 could
withdraw	by	himself	for	three	days	–	no	food	or	drink	would	be	required.	Then
he	would	see	what	could	be	done.	His	requests	were	met.
On	 the	 evening	 of	 the	 third	 day	 abundant	 rain	 fell,	 and	 full	 of	 praise,	 a
grateful	crowd	made	a	pilgrimage	to	his	house	and	exclaimed,	“How	did	you
do	it?	Tell	us.”
“It	was	quite	simple,”	the	rainmaker	answered.	“For	three	days	all	I	did	was
to	put	myself	in	order.	For,	I	know	that	once	I	am	in	order,	then	the	world	will
be	in	order,	and	the	drought	must	yield	place	to	the	rain.”
	
Tantra	says	that	if	you	are	in	order,	then	the	whole	world	is	in	order	for	you.
When	 you	 are	 in	 harmony,	 then	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 in	 harmony	 for	 you.
When	you	are	in	disorder,	then	the	whole	world	is	disorder.	And	the	order	must
not	 be	 a	 false	 one,	 it	must	 not	 be	 a	 forced	one.	When	you	 force	 some	order
upon	yourself,	you	simply	become	split;	deep	down	the	disorder	continues.
You	can	observe	it:	if	you	are	an	angry	person	you	can	force	your	anger,	you
can	repress	 it	deep	down	 in	 the	unconscious,	but	 it	 is	not	going	 to	disappear.
Maybe	you	become	completely	unaware	of	 it,	but	 it	 is	 there	–	and	you	know
that	it	is	there.	It	is	running	underneath	you,	it	is	in	the	dark	basement	of	your
being,	but	it	is	there.	You	can	sit	smiling	on	top	of	it,	but	you	know	it	can	erupt
any	moment.	And	your	smile	cannot	be	very	deep,	and	your	smile	cannot	be
true,	and	your	smile	will	be	just	an	effort	you	are	making	against	yourself.	A
man	who	forces	order	from	the	outside	remains	in	disorder.
Tantra	says	there	is	another	kind	of	order.	You	don’t	impose	any	order,	you
don’t	impose	any	discipline;	you	simply	drop	all	structures,	you	simply	become
natural	and	spontaneous.	It	 is	 the	greatest	step	a	man	can	be	asked	to	 take.	It
will	need	great	courage	because	the	society	will	not	like	it,	the	society	will	be
dead	against	it.	The	society	wants	a	certain	order.	If	you	follow	the	society,	the
society	is	happy	with	you.	If	you	go	a	little	bit	astray	here	and	there,	the	society
is	very	angry	–	and	the	mob	is	mad.
Tantra	is	a	rebellion.	I	don’t	call	it	revolutionary	because	it	has	no	politics	in
it.	And	I	don’t	call	it	revolutionary	because	it	has	no	plans	to	change	the	world,
it	 has	 no	 plans	 to	 change	 the	 state	 and	 the	 society.	 It	 is	 rebellious,	 it	 is
individual	rebellion.	 It	 is	one	 individual	slipping	out	of	 the	structures	and	 the
slavery.	But	the	moment	you	slip	out	of	the	slavery,	you	come	to	feel	another
kind	of	existence	around	you	that	you	have	never	felt	before	–	as	if	you	were
living	with	a	blindfold	and	suddenly	the	blindfold	has	become	loose,	your	eyes
have	opened	and	you	can	see	a	totally	different	world.
This	blindfold	is	what	you	call	your	mind	–	your	thinking,	your	prejudices,
your	 knowledge,	 your	 scriptures;	 they	 all	 make	 up	 the	 thick	 layer	 of	 the
blindfold.	 They	 are	 keeping	 you	 blind,	 they	 are	 keeping	 you	 dull,	 they	 are
keeping	you	unalive.
Tantra	wants	you	to	be	alive	–	as	alive	as	the	trees,	as	alive	as	the	rivers,	as
alive	as	the	sun	and	the	moon.	That	is	your	birthright.	You	don’t	lose	anything
by	losing	the	blindfold;	you	gain	all.	And	if	everything	is	to	be	lost	in	gaining
it,	nothing	is	lost.	Even	a	single	moment	of	utter	freedom	is	enough	to	satisfy.
And	a	long	life	of	a	hundred	years,	yoked	like	a	slave,	is	meaningless.
To	be	 in	 the	world	of	Tantra	needs	courage:	 it	 is	adventurous.	Up	 to	now,
only	a	few	people	have	been	able	to	move	on	that	path.	But	the	future	is	very
hopeful.	Tantra	will	become	more	and	more	important.	Man	understands	more
and	more	what	slavery	is,	and	man	also	understands	that	no	political	revolution
has	 proved	 revolutionary.	 All	 political	 revolutions	 finally	 turn	 into	 anti-
revolutions.	Once	revolutionaries	are	in	power	they	become	anti-revolutionary.
Power	 is	 anti-revolutionary.	 So	 there	 is	 a	 built-in	mechanism	 in	 power:	 give
anybody	 power	 and	 he	 becomes	 anti-revolutionary.	 Power	 creates	 its	 own
world.	 So	 up	 to	 now	 there	 have	 been	many	 revolutions	 in	 the	world	 and	 all
have	 failed,	 utterly	 failed;	 no	 revolution	 has	 helped.	 Now	man	 is	 becoming
aware	of	it.
Tantra	gives	a	different	perspective.	 It	 is	not	revolutionary;	 it	 is	 rebellious.
Rebellion	means	individual.	You	can	rebel	alone,	you	need	not	organize	a	party
for	 it.	 You	 can	 rebel	 alone,	 on	 your	 own.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 fight	 against	 society,
remember;	 it	 is	 just	going	beyond	society.	 It	 is	not	anti-social,	 it	 is	asocial;	 it
has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 society.	 It	 is	 not	 against	 slavery,	 it	 is	 for	 freedom	 –
freedom	to	be.
Just	look	at	your	life.	Are	you	a	free	man?	You	are	not:	there	are	a	thousand
and	 one	 bondages	 around	 you.	 You	 may	 not	 look	 at	 them,	 it	 is	 very
embarrassing;	you	may	not	recognize	them,	it	hurts.	But	it	doesn’t	change	the
situation:	you	are	a	slave.	To	move	into	the	dimension	of	Tantra	you	will	have
to	 recognize	 your	 slavery.	 It	 is	 very	 deep-rooted;	 it	 has	 to	 be	 dropped,	 and
being	aware	of	it	helps	you	to	drop	it.
Don’t	go	on	pacifying	yourself,	don’t	go	on	consoling	yourself,	don’t	go	on
saying,	“Everything	is	okay.”	It	is	not.	Nothing	is	okay,	your	whole	life	is	just	a
nightmare.	Have	a	look	at	it!	There	is	no	poetry	and	no	song	and	no	dance	and
no	love	and	no	prayer.	There	is	no	celebration.	Joy?	–	it	 is	 just	a	word	in	 the
dictionary.	 Bliss?	 –	 yes,	 you	 have	 heard	 about	 it,	 but	 you	 have	 not	 known
anything	 about	 it.	 God?	 –	 in	 the	 temples,	 in	 the	 churches.	 Yes,	 people	 talk
about	 it.	Those	who	 talk,	 they	don’t	know;	 those	who	hear,	 they	don’t	know.
All	that	is	beautiful	seems	to	be	meaningless,	and	all	that	is	meaningless	seems
to	be	very,	very	important.
A	man	goes	on	accumulating	money	and	thinks	that	he	is	doing	something
very	significant.	Human	stupidity	is	infinite.	Beware	of	it,	it	will	destroy	your
whole	life;	it	has	destroyed	millions	of	people’s	lives	down	the	ages.	Take	hold
of	your	awareness	–	that	is	the	only	possibility	to	get	out	of	stupidity.
Before	 we	 enter	 today’s	 sutras	 from	 Saraha,	 the	 founder	 of	 Tantra,
something	has	to	be	understood	about	Tantra’s	map	of	inner	consciousness.
First:	Tantra	 says	 that	 no	man	 is	 just	man,	 and	 no	woman	 is	 just	woman.
Each	man	is	both	man	and	woman,	and	so	is	each	woman	–	woman	and	man.
Adam	has	Eve	in	him,	and	Eve	has	Adam	in	her.	In	fact,	nobody	is	just	Adam
and	nobody	is	just	Eve,	we	are	Adam-Eves.	This	is	one	of	the	greatest	insights
ever	attained.
It	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 discoveries	 of	 the	 world	 because	 with	 this
understanding	 you	 can	 move	 in	 your	 inner	 direction;	 otherwise	 you	 cannot
move	 in	your	 inner	direction.	Why	does	a	man	fall	 in	 love	with	a	woman?	–
because	he	 carries	 a	woman	 inside	him,	otherwise	he	would	not	 fall	 in	 love.
And	why	 do	 you	 fall	 in	 love	with	 a	 certain	woman?	There	 are	 thousands	 of
women,	but	why,	 suddenly,	does	 a	 certain	woman	become	most	 important	 to
you,	as	if	all	other	women	have	disappeared	and	that	is	the	only	woman	in	the
world?	Why?	Why	 does	 a	 certain	 man	 attract	 you?	Why	 at	 first	 sight	 does
something	suddenly	click?	Tantra	says	you	are	carrying	an	image	of	a	woman
inside	you,	an	image	of	a	man	inside	you.	Each	man	is	carrying	a	woman	and
each	woman	is	carrying	a	man.	When	somebody	on	the	outside	fits	with	your
inner	image,	you	fall	in	love	–	that	is	the	meaning	of	love.
You	don’t	understand	 it;	you	 simply	 shrug	your	 shoulders	and	 say,	 “It	has
happened.”	But	 there	 is	 a	 subtle	mechanism	 in	 it.	Why	 did	 it	 happen	with	 a
certain	woman,	why	not	with	others?	Your	inner	image	fits	somehow,	the	outer
woman	 is	 similar	 in	 a	way.	 Something	 just	 hits	 your	 inner	 image.	You	 feel,
“This	is	my	woman,”	or	“This	is	my	man”;	this	feeling	is	what	love	is.	But	the
outer	 woman	 is	 not	 going	 to	 satisfy,	 because	 no	 outer	 woman	 is	 going	 to
completely	fit	with	your	inner	woman.	The	reality	is	not	that	way	at	all.	Maybe
she	 fits	 a	 little	bit	 –	 there	 is	 an	appeal,	 a	magnetism,	but	 it	will	 be	worn	out
sooner	 or	 later.	 Soon	 you	 will	 recognize	 that	 there	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one
things	 that	 you	don’t	 like	 in	 the	woman.	 It	will	 take	 a	 little	 time	 to	 come	 to
know	about	those	things.
First	 you	 will	 be	 infatuated.	 First	 the	 similarity	 will	 be	 too	much,	 it	 will
overwhelm	you.	But	by	and	by	you	will	see	that	there	are	a	thousand	and	one
things,	details	of	life,	that	don’t	fit	–	that	you	are	aliens,	strangers.	Yes,	you	still
love	 her,	 but	 the	 love	 has	 no	 more	 infatuation,	 that	 romantic	 vision	 is
disappearing.	And	she	will	 also	 recognize	 that	 something	appeals	 in	you,	but
your	totality	is	not	appealing.	That’s	why	each	husband	tries	to	change	the	wife
and	each	wife	tries	to	change	the	husband.	What	are	they	trying	to	do?	Why?
Why	does	a	wife	continuously	try	to	change	the	husband?	For	what?	She	has
fallen	 in	 love	with	 this	man,	 then	 immediately	she	starts	changing	him?	Now
she	 has	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 dissimilarities.	 She	 wants	 to	 drop	 those
dissimilarities;	 she	 wants	 to	 take	 a	 few	 chunks	 off	 this	 man	 so	 that	 he
completely	 fits	with	 her	 idea	 of	 a	man.	And	 the	 husband	 also	 tries	 –	 not	 so
hard,	not	so	stubbornly	as	women	try	because	the	husband	becomes	tired	very
soon	–	the	woman	hopes	longer.
The	 woman	 thinks,	 “Today	 or	 tomorrow	 or	 the	 day	 after	 tomorrow	 –
someday	 he	 will	 change.”	 It	 takes	 almost	 twenty,	 twenty-five	 years	 to
recognize	the	fact	that	you	cannot	change	the	other.	By	the	age	of	fifty,	when
the	woman	has	passed	her	menopause	and	the	man	too,	when	they	are	getting
really	old,	 then	 they	become	alert	 by	 and	by	 that	nothing	has	 changed.	They
have	 tried	hard,	 they	have	 tried	every	way;	 the	woman	remains	 the	same	and
the	 man	 remains	 the	 same.	 Nobody	 can	 change	 anybody.	 This	 is	 a	 great
experience	to	come	to,	a	great	understanding.
That’s	why	old	people	become	more	tolerant:	they	know	that	nothing	can	be
done.	That’s	why	old	people	become	more	graceful:	they	know	that	things	are
as	they	are.	That’s	why	old	people	become	more	accepting.	Young	people	are
very	angry,	nonaccepting;	they	want	to	change	everything:	they	want	to	make
the	 world	 the	 way	 they	 would	 like	 it.	 They	 struggle	 hard,	 but	 it	 has	 never
happened.	It	cannot	happen,	it	is	not	in	the	nature	of	things.
The	outer	man	can	never	fit	with	your	inner	man,	and	the	outer	woman	can
never	 be	 absolutely	 the	 same	 as	 your	 inner	 woman.	 That’s	 why	 love	 gives
pleasure	 and	 also	 pain,	 love	 gives	 happiness	 and	 also	 unhappiness.	 And	 the
unhappiness	is	much	more	than	the	happiness.	What	does	Tantra	propose	about
it,	what	has	to	be	done	then?
Tantra	says	that	there	is	no	way	to	be	satisfied	with	the	outer;	you	will	have
to	move	inward.	You	will	have	to	find	your	inner	woman	and	inner	man;	you
will	have	to	attain	to	a	sexual	intercourse	inside.	That	is	a	great	contribution.
How	can	it	happen?	Try	to	understand	this	map.	I	have	talked	about	seven
chakras,	 the	 Yoga-Tantra	 physiology.	 In	 man	 the	 muladhar	 is	 male	 and
svadhishthan,	female.	In	woman	the	muladhar	is	female	and	the	svadhishthan,
male,	 and	 so	 on	 and	 so	 forth.	 In	 seven	 chakras,	 up	 to	 the	 sixth,	 the	 duality
remains;	the	seventh	is	nondual.
There	are	three	pairs	inside	you:	the	muladhar-svadhishthan	have	to	marry;
the	manipura-anahata	have	to	marry;	the	vishuddha-agya	have	to	marry.
When	 the	 energy	moves	 outside,	 you	 need	 a	woman	 outside.	You	 have	 a
little	glimpse	for	a	moment	–	because	the	coition	with	a	woman	outside	cannot
be	 permanent,	 it	 can	 be	 only	momentary.	 For	 a	 single	moment	 you	 can	 lose
yourself	in	each	other.	Again	you	are	thrown	back	to	yourself,	and	thrown	back
with	 a	 vengeance.	 That’s	 why	 after	 each	 lovemaking,	 there	 is	 a	 certain
frustration:	 you	 have	 failed	 again,	 it	 didn’t	 happen	 the	way	you	wanted	 it	 to
happen.	Yes,	you	reached	to	a	peak,	but	before	you	had	even	become	aware	of
it,	the	decline,	the	fall	began.	Before	the	peak	was	achieved,	the	valley.	Before
you	had	met	the	woman	or	the	man,	the	separation.	Divorce	comes	so	fast	with
marriage	that	it	is	frustrating.	All	lovers	are	frustrated	people:	they	hope	much,
they	hope	against	their	experience,	they	hope	again	and	again	–	but	nothing	can
be	done.	You	cannot	destroy	the	laws	of	reality.	You	have	to	understand	those
laws.
The	 outer	 meeting	 can	 only	 be	 momentary,	 but	 the	 inner	 meeting	 can
become	eternal.	And	the	higher	you	move,	the	more	eternal	it	can	become.	The
first	chakra,	the	muladhar,	in	man	is	male.	Even	while	making	love	to	a	woman
outside,	Tantra	says,	remember	the	inner.	Make	love	to	the	woman	outside,	but
remember	 the	 inner.	 Let	 your	 consciousness	 move	 inward.	 Forget	 the	 outer
woman	 completely.	 In	 the	moment	 of	 orgasm	 forget	 the	woman	 or	 the	man
completely.	Close	your	eyes	and	be	in,	and	let	it	be	a	meditation.	When	energy
is	stirred,	don’t	miss	this	opportunity.	That	is	the	moment	when	you	can	have	a
contact	–	an	inward	journey.
Ordinarily	it	is	difficult	to	look	in;	but	in	a	love	moment	there	is	some	gap,
you	 are	 not	 ordinary.	 In	 a	 love	 moment	 you	 are	 at	 your	 maximum.	 When
orgasm	happens,	your	whole	body	energy	 is	 throbbing	with	dance;	 each	cell,
each	fiber	dancing	in	a	rhythm,	in	a	harmony,	that	you	don’t	know	in	ordinary
life.	This	is	the	moment,	this	moment	of	harmony;	use	it	as	a	passage	inward.
While	making	love,	become	meditative,	look	in.
A	door	opens	at	that	moment	–	this	is	the	Tantra	experience.	A	door	opens	in
that	moment,	and	Tantra	says	that	you	feel	happy	only	because	that	door	opens
and	something	of	your	inner	bliss	flows	to	you.	It	is	not	coming	from	the	outer
woman,	it	is	not	coming	from	the	outer	man;	it	is	coming	from	your	innermost
core.	The	outer	is	just	an	excuse.
Tantra	does	not	say	that	to	make	love	to	the	outer	is	sin,	it	simply	says	that	it
is	not	very	far-reaching.	It	does	not	condemn	it,	it	accepts	its	naturalness,	but	it
says	that	you	can	use	that	love	wave	to	go	far	inside.	In	that	moment	of	thrill,
things	are	not	on	the	earth:	you	can	fly.	Your	arrow	can	lead	the	bow	toward	the
target.
If	while	making	love	you	become	meditative,	you	become	silent,	you	start
looking	 in,	 you	 close	your	 eyes,	 you	 forget	 the	outer	man	or	woman,	 then	 it
happens.	 The	muladhar,	 your	 male	 center	 inside,	 starts	 moving	 toward	 the
female	center	–	the	female	center	is	the	svadhishthan	–	and	there	is	a	coition,
there	is	an	intercourse	inside.
Sometimes	it	happens	without	your	knowing	it.	One	man	writes	to	me	again
and	again,	and	he	must	be	wondering	why	I	do	not	answer.	The	map	was	not
available	up	to	now,	now	I	am	giving	you	the	map.	Listening	to	me	he	always
feels	as	if	he	is	going	into	orgasm.	His	whole	body	starts	throbbing,	and	he	has
the	 same	 experience	 as	 he	 has	while	making	 love	 to	 a	woman.	He	 becomes
very	 puzzled	 –	 naturally	 so.	He	 loses	 track	 of	what	 he	was	 listening	 to	 –	 he
forgets,	 and	 the	 thrill	 is	 so	much	 and	 the	 joy	 is	 so	much	 that	 he	 is	worried.
What	is	happening?	What	is	this	inside	him?
This	 is	 happening:	 the	muladhar	 is	 meeting	 with	 the	 svadhishthan,	 your
male	center	is	meeting	with	your	female	center.	This	is	the	joy	when	you	move
into	meditation,	 when	 you	move	 into	 prayer;	 this	 is	 the	mechanism	 of	 your
inner	 celebration.	And	 the	moment	 the	muladhar	and	svadhishthan	meet,	 the
energy	 is	 released.	 Just	 as	 when	 you	 love	 your	 woman,	 energy	 is	 released,
when	the	svadhishthan	and	muladhar	meet,	energy	is	released	and	that	energy
hits	the	higher	center,	the	manipura.
The	 manipura	 is	 male,	 the	 anahata	 is	 female.	 Once	 you	 have	 become
attuned	to	the	first	meeting	of	your	man	and	woman	inside,	one	day	the	second
meeting	 suddenly	happens.	You	do	not	have	 to	do	anything	about	 it;	 just	 the
energy	 released	 from	 the	 first	 meeting	 creates	 the	 possibility	 for	 the	 second
meeting.	 And	 when	 energy	 is	 created	 by	 the	 second	 meeting,	 it	 creates	 the
possibility	for	the	third	meeting.
The	third	meeting	is	between	the	vishuddha	and	agya.	And	when	 the	 third
meeting	happens,	the	energy	is	created	for	the	fourth,	which	is	not	a	meeting,
which	is	not	a	union,	but	unity.	The	sahasrar	is	alone;	there	is	no	male-female.
Adam	 and	 Eve	 have	 disappeared	 into	 each	 other	 totally,	 utterly.	 Man	 has
become	the	woman,	 the	woman	has	become	the	man;	all	division	disappears.
This	 is	 the	 absolute,	 the	 eternal	 meeting.	 This	 is	 what	 Hindus	 call	 sat-chit-
anand.	This	is	what	Jesus	calls	“the	Kingdom	of	God.”
In	fact	the	number	seven	has	been	used	by	all	the	religions.	Seven	days	are
symbolic	 and	 the	 seventh	 day	 is	 the	 holiday,	 the	 holy	 day.	 Six	 days	 God
worked	and	on	the	seventh	day	he	rested.	You	will	have	to	work	on	six	chakras,
the	seventh	is	the	state	of	great	rest,	utter	rest,	absolute	relaxation	–	you	have
come	home.
With	the	seventh	you	disappear	as	part	of	duality;	all	polarities	disappear,	all
distinctions	 disappear.	 Night	 is	 no	 longer	 night,	 and	 day	 is	 no	 longer	 day.
Summer	 is	 no	 longer	 summer,	 and	 winter	 is	 no	 longer	 winter.	 Matter	 is	 no
longer	matter,	and	mind	is	no	longer	mind	–	you	have	gone	beyond.	This	is	the
transcendental	space	Buddha	calls	nirvana.
These	 three	meetings	 inside	 you,	 and	 the	 achievement	 of	 the	 fourth,	 have
another	 dimension	 too.	 I	 have	 talked	 to	 you	 many	 times	 about	 four	 states:
sleep,	dream,	waking,	 turiya.	Turiya	means	“the	fourth,”	“the	beyond.”	These
seven	chakras,	and	the	work	 through	them,	have	a	correspondence	with	 these
four	states	also.
The	first	meeting	between	the	muladhar	and	svadhishthan	is	like	sleep.	The
meeting	happens,	 but	 you	 cannot	 be	very	 aware	of	 it.	You	will	 enjoy	 it,	 you
will	feel	a	great	freshness	arising	in	you.	You	will	feel	great	rest,	as	if	you	have
slept	deeply;	but	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	it	exactly	–	it	is	very	dark.	The	man
and	woman	 have	met	 inside	 you,	 but	 they	 have	met	 in	 the	 unconscious;	 the
meeting	was	not	in	the	daylight,	it	was	in	the	dark	night.	Yes,	the	result	will	be
felt,	the	consequence	will	be	felt.	You	will	suddenly	feel	a	new	energy	in	you,	a
new	radiance,	a	new	glow.	You	will	have	an	aura.	Even	others	may	start	feeling
that	you	have	a	certain	quality	of	presence,	a	vibe.	But	you	will	not	be	exactly
alert	to	what	is	happening,	so	the	first	meeting	is	like	sleep.
The	second	meeting	is	like	dreaming:	when	the	manipura	and	anahata	meet,
your	meeting	with	the	inner	woman	is	as	if	you	have	met	in	a	dream.	Yes,	you
can	 remember	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 it,	 just	 as	 in	 the	morning	you	 can	 remember	 the
dream	 that	 you	 had	 last	 night	 –	 a	 little	 bit	 here	 and	 there,	 a	 few	 glimpses.
Maybe	something	has	been	forgotten,	maybe	the	whole	is	not	remembered,	but
still	you	can	remember.	The	second	meeting	is	like	dreaming.	You	will	become
more	aware	of	it,	you	will	start	feeling	that	something	is	happening.	You	will
start	feeling	that	you	are	changing,	that	a	transformation	is	on	the	way,	that	you
are	 no	 longer	 the	 old	 person.	And	with	 the	 second,	 you	will	 start	 becoming
aware	that	your	interest	in	the	outer	woman	is	lessening	or	your	interest	in	the
outer	man	is	not	as	infatuating	as	it	used	to	be.
With	 the	 first	 there	will	 also	be	a	change,	but	you	will	not	be	aware	of	 it.
With	the	first	you	may	start	thinking	that	you	are	no	longer	interested	in	your
woman,	but	you	will	 not	be	 able	 to	understand	 that	you	are	not	 interested	 in
any	woman	at	all.	You	may	think	you	are	bored	with	your	woman	and	you	will
be	happier	with	some	other	woman;	a	change	will	be	good,	a	different	climate
will	 be	 good,	 a	 different	 quality	 of	woman	will	 be	 good.	This	will	 be	 just	 a
guess.	With	the	second	you	will	start	feeling	that	you	are	no	longer	interested
in	the	woman	or	the	man,	that	your	interest	is	turning	inward.
With	 the	 third	 you	 will	 become	 perfectly	 aware;	 it	 is	 like	 waking.	 The
vishuddha	meeting	the	agya:	you	will	become	perfectly	aware,	the	meeting	is
happening	 in	 the	 daylight.	 Or	 you	 can	 say	 it	 in	 this	 way:	 the	 first	 meeting
happens	 in	 the	 dark	 middle	 of	 the	 night,	 the	 second	 meeting	 happens	 in	 a
twilight	time	between	the	night	and	the	day,	the	third	meeting	happens	in	full
noon	–	you	are	fully	alert,	everything	is	clear.	Now	you	know	you	are	finished
with	 the	outer.	 It	does	not	mean	you	will	 leave	your	wife	or	your	husband,	 it
simply	 means	 that	 the	 infatuation	 is	 no	 more.	 You	 will	 feel	 compassion.
Certainly	the	woman	who	has	helped	you	so	far	is	a	great	friend,	the	man	who
has	brought	you	so	far	is	a	great	friend;	you	are	grateful.	You	will	start	being
grateful	and	compassionate	to	each	other.
It	is	always	so:	when	understanding	arises	it	brings	compassion.	If	you	leave
your	 wife	 and	 escape	 to	 the	 forest,	 that	 simply	 shows	 you	 are	 cruel	 and
compassion	has	not	arisen.	It	can	be	only	out	of	nonunderstanding,	it	cannot	be
out	of	understanding.	If	you	understand	you	will	have	compassion.
	
When	Buddha	 became	 enlightened,	 the	 first	 thing	 he	 said	 to	 his	 disciples
was,	“I	would	like	to	go	to	Yashodhara	and	talk	to	her”	–	his	wife.
Ananda	was	very	disturbed.	He	said,	“What	is	the	point	of	your	going	back
to	the	palace	and	talking	to	your	wife?	You	have	left	her	–	twelve	years	have
passed.”	And	Ananda	was	also	a	little	bit	disturbed	because	how	can	a	buddha
think	about	his	wife?	Buddhas	are	not	expected	to	think	that	way.
When	the	others	had	left,	Ananda	said	to	Buddha,	“This	is	not	good.	What
will	people	think?”
Buddha	said,	“What	will	people	think?	I	have	to	express	my	gratitude	to	her,
and	 I	 have	 to	 thank	 her	 for	 all	 the	 help	 she	 gave	 me.	 And	 I	 have	 to	 give
something	of	that	which	has	happened	to	me	–	I	owe	that	much	to	her.	I	will
have	to	go.”
He	went	back,	he	went	to	the	palace,	he	saw	his	wife.	Certainly	Yashodhara
was	mad;	this	man	had	escaped	one	night	without	even	saying	anything	to	her.
She	said	to	Buddha,	“Couldn’t	you	have	trusted	me?	You	could	have	said	that
you	 wanted	 to	 go,	 and	 I	 would	 have	 been	 the	 last	 woman	 in	 the	 world	 to
prevent	 you.	 Couldn’t	 you	 have	 trusted	 me	 even	 that	 much?”	 And	 she	 was
crying	–	twelve	years	of	anger!	This	man	had	escaped	like	a	thief	in	the	middle
of	the	night	–	suddenly,	without	giving	a	single	hint	to	her.
Buddha	 apologized.	 And	 he	 said,	 “It	 was	 out	 of	 nonunderstanding.	 I	 was
ignorant,	I	was	not	aware.	But	now	I	am	aware	and	I	know;	that’s	why	I	have
come	back.	You	have	helped	me	 tremendously.	Forget	 those	 old	 things;	 now
there	is	no	point	in	thinking	about	spilt	milk.	Look	at	me	–	something	great	has
happened.	I	have	come	home.	And	I	felt	my	first	duty	was	toward	you,	to	come
and	to	convey	and	to	share	my	experience	with	you.”
The	anger	gone,	the	rage	subsided,	Yashodhara	looked	out	through	her	tears.
Yes,	this	man	had	changed	tremendously;	this	was	not	the	same	man	she	used
to	 know.	 This	 was	 not	 the	 same	 man,	 not	 at	 all.	 He	 looked	 like	 a	 great
luminosity:	she	could	almost	see	the	aura,	a	light	around	him.	And	he	was	so
peaceful	 and	 so	 silent;	 he	 had	 almost	 disappeared,	 his	 presence	 was	 almost
absence.	And	then,	in	spite	of	herself,	she	forgot	what	she	was	doing.	She	fell
at	his	feet	and	she	asked	to	be	initiated.
	
When	you	understand,	there	is	bound	to	be	compassion.	That’s	why	I	don’t
say	to	my	sannyasins	to	leave	their	families.	Be	there.
Rabindranath	has	written	a	poem	about	 this	 incident	–	when	Buddha	goes.
Yashodhara	asked	him	one	thing:	“Just	tell	me	one	thing,”	she	said.	“Whatever
you	have	attained	–	I	can	see	you	have	attained,	whatsoever	it	is,	I	don’t	know
what	 it	 is	–	 just	 tell	me	one	thing:	Was	it	not	possible	 to	attain	 it	here	 in	 this
house?”
And	Buddha	could	not	say	no.	It	was	possible	to	attain	it	there	in	the	house.
Now	he	knew,	because	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	forest	or	with	town,	with	the
family	or	with	an	ashram.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	any	place;	it	has	something
to	do	with	your	innermost	core.	It	is	available	everywhere.
First,	you	will	start	feeling	that	your	interest	in	the	other	is	loosening.	It	will
be	a	dim	phenomenon,	dark	–	looking	through	a	dark	glass,	looking	through	a
very	 foggy	morning.	Second,	 things	become	a	 little	clearer,	 like	a	dream,	 the
fog	 is	 not	 so	much.	 Third,	 you	 are	 fully	 awake	 –	 it	 has	 happened,	 the	 inner
woman	has	met	the	inner	man.	The	bipolarity	is	no	longer	there:	suddenly	you
are	one.	Schizophrenia	has	disappeared,	you	are	not	split.
With	this	integration	you	become	an	individual.	Before	that	you	were	not	an
individual,	 you	were	 a	 crowd,	 you	were	 a	mob,	 you	were	many	people,	 you
were	multi-psychic.	Suddenly	you	fall	into	order.	That’s	what	this	ancient	story
says.
The	man	had	asked	for	three	days…	If	sometimes	you	look	into	these	small
stories	you	will	be	wonderstruck;	their	symbols	are	great.	The	man	had	asked
for	 three	 days	 to	 sit	 silently.	Why	 three	 days?	Those	 are	 the	 three	 points:	 in
sleep,	in	dream,	in	waking;	he	wanted	to	put	himself	in	order.	First	it	happens
in	sleep,	then	it	happens	in	dreams,	then	it	happens	in	waking.	And	when	you
are	 in	 order,	 the	whole	of	 existence	 is	 in	 order.	When	you	 are	 an	 individual,
when	your	split	has	disappeared	and	you	are	bridged	together,	then	everything
is	bridged	together.
It	 will	 look	 very	 paradoxical,	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be	 said:	 the	 individual	 is	 the
universal.	When	you	have	become	an	individual,	suddenly	you	see	that	you	are
the	universal.	Up	to	now	you	have	been	thinking	that	you	were	separate	from
existence;	 now	 you	 cannot	 think	 that.	 Adam	 and	 Eve	 have	 disappeared	 into
each	 other.	 This	 is	 the	 goal	 that	 everybody	 is	 trying	 to	 find	 in	 some	way	 or
other.	Tantra	is	the	surest	science	for	achieving	it;	this	is	the	target.
A	few	more	things:	I	told	you	that	the	muladhar	has	to	be	relaxed,	only	then
can	the	energy	move	upward,	inward.	And	inward	and	upward	mean	the	same;
outward	 and	downward	mean	 the	 same.	Energy	 can	move	 inward	or	 upward
only	when	the	muladhar	is	relaxed.	So	the	first	thing	is	to	relax	the	muladhar.
You	are	holding	your	sex	center	very	tight.	The	society	has	made	you	very
aware	of	the	sex	center;	it	has	made	you	obsessed	with	it,	so	you	are	holding	it
tight.	 You	 can	 simply	watch.	 You	 are	 always	 holding	 your	 genital	 organism
very	tight,	as	if	you	are	afraid	that	something	will	go	amiss	if	you	relax.	Your
whole	conditioning	has	been	to	keep	it	uptight.	Relax	it;	leave	it	to	itself.	Don’t
be	afraid	–	fear	creates	tension.	Drop	the	fear.	Sex	is	beautiful;	it	is	not	a	sin,	it
is	 a	virtue.	Once	you	 think	 in	 terms	of	 its	 being	 a	virtue	you	will	 be	 able	 to
relax.
I	 have	 talked	 about	 how	 to	 relax	 the	muladhar	 before.	And	 I	 have	 talked
about	how	to	relax	the	svadhishthan;	 it	 is	 the	death	center.	Don’t	be	afraid	of
death.	These	are	the	two	fears	which	have	been	dominating	humanity:	the	fear
of	sex	and	the	fear	of	death.	Both	fears	are	dangerous;	they	have	not	allowed
you	to	grow.	Drop	both	the	fears.
The	third	chakra	is	the	manipura;	it	is	loaded	with	negative	emotions.	That’s
why	your	stomach	becomes	disturbed	when	you	are	emotionally	disturbed;	the
manipura	 is	 affected	 immediately.	 In	 all	 the	 languages	of	 the	world	we	have
expressions	like,	“I	cannot	stomach	it.”	It	is	literally	true.	Sometimes	when	you
cannot	 stomach	 a	 certain	 thing	you	 start	 feeling	nauseous,	 you	would	 like	 to
vomit.	 In	 fact	 sometimes	 it	 happens	 –	 a	 psychological	 vomit.	 Somebody	has
said	something	and	you	cannot	stomach	it,	and	suddenly	you	feel	nausea:	you
vomit,	and	after	vomiting	you	feel	very	relaxed.
In	yoga	 they	have	methods	for	 it.	The	yogi	has	 to	drink	a	 large	amount	of
water	 in	 the	 morning	 –	 a	 bucketful	 of	 water	 with	 salt;	 the	 water	 has	 to	 be
lukewarm	–	and	then	he	has	to	vomit	it.	It	helps	to	relax	the	manipura.	It	is	a
great	process,	a	great	cleansing	process.
You	will	be	surprised:	now	many	modern	 therapies	have	become	aware	of
that	 vomiting	 helps.	 It	 releases	 the	manipura.	 Tantra	 and	 yoga	 have	 always
been	aware	of	it.
The	negative	emotions	–	anger,	hatred,	jealousy	and	so	forth	–	have	all	been
repressed.	Your	manipura	is	overloaded.	Those	repressed	emotions	don’t	allow
the	 energy	 to	 go	 up;	 those	 repressed	 emotions	 function	 like	 a	 rock:	 your
passage	 is	 blocked.	 Encounter,	 Gestalt,	 and	 therapies	 like	 that,	 all	 function
unknowingly	 on	 the	manipura.	 They	 try	 to	 provoke	 your	 anger,	 they	 try	 to
provoke	 your	 jealousy,	 your	 greed;	 they	 provoke	 your	 aggression,	 your
violence,	so	that	it	bubbles	up,	surfaces.	The	society	has	done	one	thing:	it	has
trained	you	to	repress	all	that	is	negative	and	pretend	all	that	is	positive.	Now,
both	are	dangerous.	To	pretend	the	positive	is	false,	hypocrisy,	and	to	repress
the	negative	is	dangerous;	it	is	poisonous,	it	is	poisoning	your	system.
Tantra	says	to	express	 the	negative	and	allow	the	positive.	If	anger	comes,
don’t	 repress	 it;	 if	 aggression	comes,	don’t	 repress	 it.	Tantra	does	not	 say	go
and	 kill	 a	 person	 –	 but	 Tantra	 says	 that	 there	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 ways	 to
express	 the	 repressed	 emotions.	You	 can	 go	 into	 the	 garden	 and	 chop	wood.
Have	 you	 watched	 woodcutters?	 They	 look	 more	 silent	 than	 anybody	 else.
Have	you	watched	hunters?	Hunters	are	very	good	people.	They	do	a	very	dirty
thing,	 but	 they	 are	 good	 people.	 Something	 happens	 to	 them	while	 they	 are
hunting.	 Killing	 animals,	 their	 anger,	 their	 aggression	 is	 dissolved.	 The	 so-
called	nonviolent	people	are	the	ugliest	in	the	world.	They	are	not	good	people
because	they	are	holding	down	a	volcano.	You	cannot	feel	at	ease	with	them;
something	is	dangerously	present	there	–	you	can	feel	it,	you	can	touch	it,	it	is
oozing	out	of	them.
You	 can	 just	 go	 into	 the	 forest	 and	 shout,	 scream.	 Primal	 Therapy	 is	 just
scream	 therapy,	 tantrum	 therapy.	 And	 Encounter	 and	 Primal,	 Gestalt,	 are	 of
tremendous	help	in	relaxing	the	manipura.
Once	 the	manipura	 is	 relaxed	 there	 arises	 a	 balance	 between	 the	 negative
and	the	positive.	And	when	the	negative	and	positive	are	balanced,	the	passage
is	 open;	 then	 the	 energy	 can	 move	 higher.	 The	 manipura	 is	 male.	 If	 the
manipura	is	blocked,	then	energy	cannot	go	upward.	It	has	to	be	relaxed.
Anything	 that	 can	 be	 of	 help	 has	 to	 be	 used,	 because	 man	 has	 been	 so
damaged	that	all	sources	of	help	should	be	made	available.	You	may	not	even
be	able	to	understand	why	I	am	making	available	all	the	methods	to	you:	Yoga,
Tantra,	 Tao,	 Sufi,	 Jaina,	 Buddhist,	 Hindu,	 Gestalt,	 Psychodrama,	 Encounter,
Primal	Therapy,	Polarity	Balancing,	Rolfing,	Structural	Integration	–	why	I	am
making	all	these	things	available	to	you.	You	have	never	heard	of	these	things
being	done	in	any	ashram	anywhere	in	the	East	at	all.	There	is	a	reason	for	it:
man	has	been	damaged	so	much	that	all	sources	should	be	tapped.	Help	should
be	taken	from	every	source	possible;	only	then	there	is	hope.	Otherwise	man	is
doomed.
The	 fourth	 chakra	 is	 the	 anahata.	 Doubt	 is	 the	 problem	 with	 the	 fourth
chakra;	if	you	are	a	doubting	person,	your	fourth	chakra	will	remain	unopened.
Trust	opens	it.	So	anything	that	creates	doubt	destroys	your	heart.	The	anahata
is	 the	 heart	 chakra.	 Logic,	 logic	 chopping,	 argumentativeness,	 too	 much
rationality,	 too	 much	 of	 Aristotle	 in	 you,	 destroy	 the	 anahata.	 Philosophy,
skepticism,	destroy	the	anahata.
If	you	want	to	open	the	anahata,	you	will	have	to	be	more	trusting.	Poetry	is
more	helpful	than	philosophy,	and	intuition	is	more	helpful	than	reasoning,	and
feeling	is	more	helpful	than	thinking.	So	you	will	have	to	shift	from	doubt	to
trust,	only	then	does	your	anahata	open,	does	your	anahata	become	capable	of
receiving	the	male	energy	from	the	manipura.	The	anahata	is	female;	it	closes
with	doubt,	it	becomes	frigid	with	doubt,	it	becomes	dry	with	doubt	–	it	cannot
receive	the	male	energy.	It	opens	with	trust:	with	trust,	moisture	is	released	in
that	chakra	and	it	can	allow	the	penetration	of	the	male	energy.
Then	 the	 fifth:	 the	 vishuddha.	 Noncreativity,	 imitativeness,	 parroting,
monkeying	–	these	are	damaging.
The	vishuddha	is	destroyed	by	copying.	Don’t	be	an	imitator,	don’t	be	just	a
carbon	copy.	Don’t	try	to	become	a	Buddha	and	don’t	try	to	become	a	Christ.
Beware	of	books	like	Thomas	à	Kempis’	book	Imitation	of	Christ	–	beware.	No
imitation	 is	 going	 to	 help.	 The	 vishuddha	 is	 destroyed	 by	 noncreativity,
imitation;	and	it	 is	helped	by	creativity,	expression,	finding	your	own	style	of
life,	being	courageous	enough	to	“do	your	own	thing.”	Art,	song,	music,	dance,
inventiveness	are	all	helpful.	But	be	inventive	–	whatsoever	you	do,	try	to	do	it
in	 a	 new	way.	 Try	 to	 bring	 some	 individuality	 into	 it,	 bring	 some	 authentic
signature.	Even	cleaning	a	floor,	you	can	do	it	in	your	own	way;	even	cooking
food,	you	 can	do	 it	 in	your	own	way.	You	can	bring	 creativity	 to	 everything
that	you	do;	it	should	be	brought.	In	as	much	as	you	are	creative	the	vishuddha
will	open.	And	when	the	vishuddha	opens,	only	then	can	the	energy	move	into
the	agya,	the	third-eye	center,	the	sixth	center.
This	 is	 the	 process:	 first	 cleanse	 every	 center,	 purify	 it,	 beware	 of	 what
damages	 it,	 and	 help	 it	 so	 that	 it	 becomes	 naturally	 functioning.	 Blocks	 are
removed,	energy	rushes.
Beyond	the	sixth	is	the	sahasrar,	the	turiya,	the	one-thousand-petaled	lotus.
You	bloom.	Yes,	 that’s	 exactly	what	 it	 is.	Man	 is	 a	 tree:	 the	muladhar	 is	 the
root	 and	 sahasrar	 is	 the	 blooming	 of	 it.	 The	 flower	 has	 bloomed,	 your
fragrance	 is	 released	 to	 the	 winds.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 prayer;	 that	 is	 the	 only
offering	 to	 the	 feet	 of	 the	divine.	Borrowed	 flowers	won’t	 do,	 stolen	 flowers
from	the	trees	won’t	do;	you	have	to	flower	and	offer	your	flowers.
Now	the	sutras	of	Saraha.	The	first:
For	the	delights	of	kissing	the	deluded	crave,
declaring	it	to	be	the	ultimately	real	–
like	a	man	who	leaves	his	house	and	standing	at	the	door
asks	a	woman	for	reports	of	sensual	delights.
Kissing	 is	 symbolic	 –	 symbolic	 of	 any	 meeting	 between	 yin	 and	 yang,
between	male	and	female,	between	Shiva	and	Shakti.	Whether	you	are	holding
hands	with	a	woman	–	this	is	a	kissing,	hands	kissing	each	other	–	or	you	are
touching	her	lips	with	your	lips,	that	is	kissing;	or	your	genital	organs	together
–	that	too	is	a	kiss.	So	the	kiss	is	symbolic	in	Tantra	of	all	meetings	of	opposite
polarities.	Sometimes	you	can	kiss	just	by	seeing	a	woman.	If	your	eyes	meet
and	touch	each	other	there	is	a	kiss,	the	meeting	has	happened.
For	 the	 delights	 of	 kissing	 the	 deluded	 crave,	 declaring	 it	 to	 be	 the
ultimately	real…	Saraha	says	that	the	deluded	–	the	people	who	are	not	alert	at
all	to	what	they	are	doing	–	go	on	hankering	for,	missing,	the	other:	man,	the
woman;	woman,	the	man.	They	are	continuously	hankering	to	meet	the	other	–
and	 the	 meeting	 never	 happens.	 The	 absurdity	 of	 it	 is	 this:	 you	 hanker	 and
hanker	 and	 desire	 and	 desire,	 and	 nothing	 but	 frustration	 comes	 into	 your
hands.	Saraha	says	this	 is	not	 the	ultimately	real	meeting.	The	ultimately	real
meeting	 is	 that	which	 happens	 in	 the	 sahasrar.	Once	 it	 has	 happened,	 it	 has
happened	 forever.	 That	 is	 real.	 The	 meeting	 that	 happens	 outside	 is	 unreal,
momentary,	temporal	–	just	a	delusion.
It	 is	…like	 a	 man	 who	 leaves	 his	 house	 and	 standing	 at	 the	 door	 asks	 a
woman	 for	 reports	 of	 sensual	 delights.	 A	 beautiful	 simile.	 Saraha	 says	 that
holding	the	hand	of	a	woman	outside,	while	the	woman	inside	is	waiting	to	be
yours	 and	 forever	 yours,	 is	 just	 …like	 a	 man	 who	 leaves	 his	 house	 and
standing	at	the	door	asks	a	woman	for	reports	of	sensual	delights.
First	…leaves	his	house…	You	are	leaving	your	house,	your	innermost	core,
in	 search	of	 a	woman	outside	–	 and	 the	woman	 is	within.	You	will	miss	her
wherever	you	go;	you	can	go	on	running	all	over	the	earth	and	chasing	all	sorts
of	women	and	men.	It	 is	a	mirage,	 it	 is	a	rainbow	search,	nothing	comes	into
your	hands.	The	woman	is	inside,	and	you	are	leaving	the	house.
And	 then	…standing	 at	 the	 door…	 That	 too	 is	 symbolic.	 You	 are	 always
standing	at	the	door,	by	the	senses	–	those	are	doors.	Eyes	are	doors,	hands	are
doors,	genital	organs	are	doors,	ears	are	doors	–	these	are	doors.	We	are	always
standing	at	the	door.	Looking	through	the	eyes,	hearing	through	the	ears,	trying
to	 touch	with	 the	hands,	 a	man	 continuously	 remains	 at	 the	door	 and	 forgets
how	to	go	inside	the	house.	And	then	the	absurdity	of	it	–	you	don’t	know	what
love	 is	 and	 you	 ask	 a	woman	 about	 the	 delights,	 about	 her	 experience.	 You
think	that	by	listening	to	her	experience	you	will	become	blissful.	It	 is	taking
the	menu	for	the	food.
Saraha	is	saying	that	first	you	go	out	of	yourself	–	stand	at	 the	door	–	and
then	you	ask	others	what	delight	is,	what	life	is,	what	joy	is,	what	God	is.	And
God	is	waiting	all	the	time	within	you.	He	resides	in	you,	and	you	are	asking
others.	 And	 do	 you	 think	 that	 by	 listening	 to	 them	 you	 will	 come	 to	 any
understanding?
The	stirring	of	biotic	forces	in	the	house	of	nothingness
has	given	artificial	rise	to	pleasures	in	so	many	ways.
Such	yogis	from	affliction	faint	for	they	have	fallen
from	celestial	space,	inveigled	into	vice.
First:	sex	is	not	the	ultimate	in	pleasure,	it	 is	 just	the	beginning,	the	alpha,
the	ABC	of	 it;	 it	 is	not	 the	omega.	Sex	 is	not	 the	ultimately	real,	 it	 is	not	 the
bliss	supreme,	but	just	an	echo	of	it;	the	sahasrar	is	far	away.	When	your	sex
center	 feels	 a	 little	 happiness,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 faraway	 echo	 of	 the	 sahasrar.	 The
closer	you	come	to	the	sahasrar,	the	more	happiness	you	feel.
When	you	move	from	the	muladhar	to	the	svadhishthan,	you	feel	happier	–
the	first	meeting	of	the	muladhar	and	the	svadhishthan	is	of	great	joy.	Then	the
second	meeting	is	of	even	greater	joy.	Then	the	third	meeting	and	you	cannot
believe	that	more	joy	can	be	possible;	but	still	more	is	possible	because	you	are
still	 far	 away	 –	 not	 very	 far	 but	 still	 at	 a	 distance	 –	 from	 the	 sahasrar.	 The
sahasrar	 is	 just	 incredible.	 The	 bliss	 is	 so	much	 that	 you	 are	 no	more,	 only
bliss	is.	The	bliss	is	so	much	that	you	cannot	say,	“I	am	blissful,”	you	simply
know	that	you	are	bliss.
At	the	seventh	you	are	just	a	tremor	of	joy	–	naturally	so.	Joy	happens	in	the
sahasrar	 and	 then	 it	 has	 to	 pass	 six	 layers.	Much	 is	 lost,	 it	 is	 just	 an	 echo.
Beware:	don’t	mistake	the	echo	for	the	real.	Yes,	even	in	the	echo	something	of
the	real	 is	 there.	Find	 the	 thread	of	 reality	 in	 it.	Catch	hold	of	 the	 thread	and
start	moving	inward.
The	stirring	of	biotic	forces	in	the	house	of	nothingness	has	given	artificial
rise	to	pleasures	in	so	many	ways.	And	because	of	this	delusion	that	sex	is	the
ultimate	 in	 pleasure,	 so	 many	 artificial	 things	 have	 become	 very	 important.
Money	 has	 become	 very	 important	 because	 you	 can	 purchase	 anything	 for
money:	you	can	purchase	 sex.	Power	has	become	 important	because	 through
power	 you	 can	 have	 as	much	 sex	 as	 you	want;	 a	 poor	man	 cannot	 afford	 it.
Kings	 used	 to	 have	 thousands	 of	 wives	 –	 even	 in	 the	 twentieth	 century,	 the
Nizam	of	Hyderabad	 had	 five	 hundred	wives.	Naturally,	 one	who	 has	 power
can	have	as	much	sex	as	he	wants.	Thousands	of	other	problems	have	arisen
because	of	this	delusion	that	sex	is	the	ultimately	real:	money,	power,	prestige.
The	 stirring	 of	 biotic	 forces	 in	 the	 house	 of	 nothingness…	 It	 is	 just
imagination;	 it	 is	 just	 imagination	 that	 you	 are	 thinking	 it	 is	 pleasure.	 It	 is
autohypnosis,	 autosuggestion.	And	 once	 you	 autosuggest	 to	 yourself	 it	 looks
like	 pleasure.	 Just	 think:	 holding	 the	 hand	 of	 a	 woman,	 and	 you	 feel	 such
pleasure:	it	is	just	autohypnosis.	It	is	just	an	idea	in	the	mind.
The	 stirring	 of	 biotic	 forces…	 Because	 of	 this	 idea	 in	 the	 mind,	 your
bioenergy	 is	 stirred.	 It	 is	 stirred	 sometimes	 even	while	 looking	 at	 a	Playboy
picture;	there	is	nobody,	just	lines	and	colors	–	and	your	energy	can	be	stirred.
Sometimes	 just	 an	 idea	 in	 the	mind	 and	 your	 energy	 can	 be	 stirred.	 Energy
follows	imagination.
The	 stirring	 of	 biotic	 forces	 in	 the	 house	 of	 nothingness	 –	 you	 can	 create
dreams,	 you	 can	 project	 dreams	 onto	 the	 screen	 of	 nothingness	 –	 has	 given
artificial	rise	to	pleasures	in	so	many	ways.
If	you	watch	the	pathology	of	man,	you	will	be	amazed:	people	have	such
ideas	that	you	cannot	believe	what	is	happening.	Some	man	cannot	make	love
to	his	woman	unless	he	 looks	at	pornography	first.	The	 real	 seems	 to	be	 less
real	than	the	unreal;	he	becomes	excited	only	through	the	unreal.	Have	you	not
seen	it	again	and	again	in	your	own	life	that	the	real	seems	to	be	less	exciting
than	the	unreal?
Remember	 to	 change	 your	 consciousness	 from	 the	 imaginary	 to	 the	 real.
Always	listen	to	the	real.	Unless	you	are	very,	very	alert	you	will	remain	in	the
trap	of	the	imaginary.
The	imaginary	seems	to	be	very	satisfying	for	many	reasons.	It	is	under	your
control.	You	can	have	my	nose	as	long	as	you	want	–	in	your	imagination.	You
can	 think	 whatsoever	 you	 want	 to	 think;	 nobody	 can	 hinder	 it,	 nobody	 can
enter	your	imagination,	you	are	utterly	free.	You	can	paint	me	as	you	want,	you
can	 imagine	me,	you	can	expect,	you	can	make	whatsoever	you	want	of	me.
You	are	free;	the	ego	feels	very	good.
That’s	why	when	a	master	is	dead	he	finds	more	disciples	than	while	he	is
alive.	 With	 a	 dead	 master,	 disciples	 are	 completely	 at	 ease;	 with	 a	 living
master,	 they	 are	 in	 difficulty.	Buddha	 never	 had	 as	many	disciples	 as	 he	 has
now,	after	twenty-five	centuries.	Jesus	had	only	twelve	disciples;	now,	half	of
the	earth.	Just	see	the	impact	of	the	absent	master:	now	Jesus	is	in	your	hands,
you	 can	 do	whatsoever	 you	want	 to	 do	with	 him.	He	 is	 no	 longer	 alive,	 he
cannot	destroy	your	dreams	and	 imaginations.	 If	 the	 so-called	Christians	had
seen	 the	 real	 Jesus,	 their	 hearts	 would	 stop	 fluttering	 immediately.	 Why?	 –
because	they	would	not	believe.	They	have	imagined	things,	and	Jesus	is	a	real
man.	You	could	have	found	him	in	a	pub,	drinking	with	friends	and	gossiping.
Now,	 this	 doesn’t	 look	 like	 the	 “only	 begotten	 son	 of	 God.”	 It	 looks	 very
ordinary:	maybe	he	is	just	the	carpenter	Joseph’s	son.	But	once	Jesus	is	gone,
he	cannot	interfere	with	your	imagination.	Then	you	can	picture	and	paint	and
create	images	of	him	as	you	like.
Far	away	it	is	easier:	the	imagination	has	full	power.	The	closer	you	come	to
me,	the	less	and	less	power	your	imagination	will	have.	And	you	will	never	be
able	to	see	me	unless	you	drop	your	imagination.	So	is	the	case	with	all	other
pleasures.
The	stirring	of	biotic	forces	in	the	house	of	nothingness	has	given	artificial
rise	 to	 pleasures	 in	 so	many	ways.	 Such	 yogis	 from	 affliction	 faint	 for	 they
have	fallen	from	celestial	space,	inveigled	into	vice.	If	you	imagine	too	much,
you	will	lose	your	celestial	space.	Imagination	is	samsara,	imagination	is	your
dream.	If	you	dream	too	much,	you	will	lose	the	celestial	space,	you	will	lose
your	 divinity,	 you	will	 not	 be	 a	 conscious	 being.	 Imagination	will	 outweigh
you,	it	will	overburden	you,	you	will	be	lost	in	a	fantasy.	You	can	faint	in	your
fantasy	and	you	can	 think	 that	 it	 is	samadhi.	There	are	people	who	 faint	 and
then	they	think	they	are	in	samadhi.	Buddha	has	called	such	samadhis	“wrong
samadhis.”	 So	 too	 Saraha	 says	 that	 it	 is	 a	 wrong	 samadhi.	 Imagining	 about
God,	 going	 on	 into	 your	 imagination,	 feeding	 your	 imagination,	 nurturing	 it
more	and	more,	 fantasizing	more	and	more	–	you	will	 faint,	you	will	 lose	all
consciousness;	you	will	have	beautiful	dreams	of	your	own	creation.
But	this	is	falling	from	the	celestial	space.	And	Saraha	says	that	to	fall	from
your	purity	of	awareness	is	the	only	vice.	What	does	he	mean	by	the	“celestial
space”?	Space	without	any	dreams.	Dreaming	is	 the	world;	without	dreaming
you	are	in	nirvana.
As	a	brahmin,	who	with	rice	and	butter
makes	a	burned	offering	in	blazing	fire
creating	a	vessel	for	nectar	from	celestial	space,
takes	this,	through	wishful	thinking,	as	the	ultimate.
In	India,	the	brahmins	have	been	doing	yagnas.	They	have	been	offering	rice
and	butter	to	the	fire,	the	blazing	fire,	and	imagining	that	the	offering	is	going
to	 God.	 Sitting	 around	 a	 fire,	 fasting	 for	 many	 days,	 doing	 certain	 rituals,
certain	 mantras,	 repeating	 certain	 scriptures,	 you	 can	 create	 a	 state	 of
autohypnosis.	You	 can	 be	 fooled	 by	 yourself	 and	 you	 can	 think	 that	 you	 are
reaching	God.
Saraha	says	that	those	who	really	want	to	enter	godliness	will	have	to	burn
their	inner	fire;	the	outer	fire	won’t	do.	And	those	who	really	want	to	attain	will
have	 to	 burn	 their	 own	 seeds	of	 desire;	 rice	won’t	 do.	And	 those	who	 really
want	 to	 attain	will	 have	 to	burn	 their	 ego;	 butter	won’t	 do.	Butter	 is	 just	 the
most	essential	part	of	milk,	the	most	purified	part	of	milk.	So	is	ego	the	most
purified	dream;	it	is	ghee,	purified	butter.	Offering	ghee	to	the	fire	is	not	going
to	help.	You	have	to	burn	your	inner	fire.
And	sexual	energy	moving	upward	becomes	a	fire,	it	becomes	a	flame.	It	is
fire!	Even	when	it	moves	outward,	it	gives	birth	to	life;	sex	energy	is	the	most
miraculous	 thing.	It	 is	 through	sex	energy	that	 life	 is	born.	Life	 is	fire,	 it	 is	a
function	of	fire;	without	fire,	life	cannot	exist.	Without	the	sun	there	will	be	no
trees,	no	men,	no	birds,	no	animals.	It	is	transformed	fire	that	becomes	life.
While	making	 love	 to	 a	woman,	 the	 fire	 is	 going	 outward.	While	moving
inward,	the	fire	is	going	in.	And	when	you	throw	your	seeds	of	desire,	seeds	of
thought,	seeds	of	ambition,	seeds	of	greed	into	this	fire,	they	are	burned.	And
then,	finally,	you	throw	your	ego	–	the	most	purified	dream;	that	too	is	burned.
This	is	real	yagna,	real	ritual,	real	sacrifice.
As	a	brahmin	who	with	rice	and	butter	makes	a	burned	offering	in	blazing
fire	creating	a	vessel	for	nectar	from	celestial	space,	takes	this,	through	wishful
thinking,	as	the	ultimate.	And	he	thinks,	 through	wishful	thinking,	 that	 this	is
the	ultimate.	The	man	who	is	making	love	to	a	woman	and	thinks	that	it	is	the
ultimate	is	throwing	into	the	outer	fire	in	exactly	the	same	way;	he	is	pouring
into	something	outside.	And	so	is	the	woman	who	thinks	she	is	making	love	or
moving	 into	 a	 great	 space	 of	 bliss	 and	 benediction	 by	 just	making	 love	 to	 a
man,	just	throwing	out	her	fire.
The	 fire	 has	 to	move	 inward;	 then	 it	 gives	 a	 rebirth	 to	 you,	 it	 rejuvenates
you.
Some	people,	who	have	kindled	the	inner	heat
and	raised	it	to	the	fontanel,
stroke	the	uvula	with	the	tongue	in	a	sort	of	coition
and	confuse	that	which	fetters	with	what	gives	release,
in	pride	will	call	themselves	yogis.
And	a	very	important	thing:	just	as	I	explained	to	you	the	map,	you	have	to
remember	that	the	vishuddha,	 the	fifth	chakra,	 is	 in	the	throat.	Vishuddha,	the
throat	chakra,	is	the	last	point	from	which	you	can	fall.	Up	to	that	point	there	is
a	possibility	of	falling	back.	With	the	sixth	chakra,	the	third	eye,	attained,	there
is	no	possibility	of	falling	back.	You	have	gone	beyond	the	point	from	which
one	can	return.	The	point	of	no	return	is	the	third	eye.	If	you	die	at	the	third-eye
center,	you	will	be	born	at	the	third-eye	center.	If	you	die	at	the	sahasrar,	you
will	not	be	born	again.	But	if	you	die	at	the	vishuddha,	you	will	slip	back	to	the
first,	 the	muladhar.	 In	 the	next	 life	you	will	have	 to	 start	 from	 the	muladhar
again.
So	up	to	the	fifth	there	is	no	certainty;	there	is	promise,	but	no	certainty.	Up
to	 the	 fifth	 there	 is	 every	possibility	of	 falling	back.	And	one	of	 the	greatest
possibilities	that	has	caused	many	people	in	India	to	fall	back	is,	this	sutra	says:
Some	people,	who	have	kindled	the	inner	heat	and	raised	it	to	the	fontanel…
You	can	create	the	inner	heat	–	the	flame	starts	moving	upward	and	it	comes
to	the	throat;	then	there	arises	a	great	desire	to	tickle	the	throat	with	the	tongue.
Beware	of	it.	In	India	they	have	devised	great	techniques	for	tickling	it	with	the
tongue.	They	have	even	cut	the	roots	of	the	tongue	so	that	the	tongue	becomes
long	and	can	easily	move	backward	–	you	will	find	many	yogis	doing	that.	The
tongue	 can	move	 backward	 and	 it	 can	 tickle	 the	 fifth	 center.	That	 tickling	 is
masturbatory	because	the	sex	energy	has	come	there.
Just	 as	 I	 told	 you,	 the	 fifth	 chakra,	 vishuddha,	 is	 male.	 When	 the	 male
energy	 comes	 to	 the	 throat,	 your	 throat	 becomes	 almost	 a	 genital	 organ	 –	 of
more	superiority,	of	more	finesse	than	the	genital	organ.	Just	a	little	tickle	with
the	tongue	and	you	enjoy	greatly.	But	that	is	masturbatory,	and	once	you	start
doing	that…	And	it	is	very,	very	great	pleasure,	sex	is	nothing	compared	to	it.
Remember	 it:	 sex	 is	 just	 nothing	 compared	 to	 it.	 Tickling	 with	 your	 own
tongue,	you	can	enjoy	it	so	much.	So	in	yoga	there	are	methods…
Saraha	 is	making	 it	clear	 that	no	Tantrika	should	do	 that.	 It	 is	a	deception
and	a	great	 failure	because	 the	energy	has	come	up	 to	 the	 fifth,	 and	now	 the
desire	arises	to	tickle	it;	that	is	the	last	desire.	If	you	can	keep	yourself	alert	and
can	move	 beyond	 that	 desire,	 then	 you	will	 reach	 the	 sixth	 center,	 the	agya;
otherwise	 you	 will	 start	 falling	 back.	 That	 is	 the	 last	 temptation.	 In	 fact,	 in
Tantra	 that	 is	 the	 temptation	 which	 you	 can	 say	 that	 Jesus	 had	 when	 Satan
came	and	tempted	him,	or	Buddha	had	when	Mara	came	and	tempted	him.	This
is	the	last	temptation,	the	last	effort	of	your	desire-mind,	the	last	effort	of	your
dream	world,	 the	 last	effort	of	 the	ego	before	 it	 is	 lost	utterly.	 It	makes	a	 last
effort	 to	 tempt	 you.	And	 the	 temptation	 is	 really	 great:	 it	 is	 very	 difficult	 to
avoid	it.	It	is	so	pleasurable,	infinitely	more	pleasurable	than	sex	pleasure.
When	people	think	that	sex	pleasure	is	the	ultimate,	what	to	say	about	this
pleasure?	 And	 it	 loses	 no	 energy.	 In	 sex	 you	 have	 to	 lose	 energy;	 you	 feel
frustrated,	tired,	weak.	But	if	you	tickle	your	sex	energy	when	it	has	come	to
the	throat,	there	is	no	loss	of	energy.	And	you	can	go	on	tickling	the	whole	day
–	that’s	what	Jose	Delgado	has	attained	through	mechanical	devices.
Some	people,	who	have	kindled	the	inner	heat	and	raised	it	to	the	fontanel,
stroke	 the	 uvula	with	 the	 tongue	 in	 a	 sort	 of	 coition	 and	 confuse	 that	which
fetters	with	that	which	gives	release…	This	is	again	samsara	–	falling	back	into
samsara.	…and	 confuse	 that	 which	 fetters	 with	 that	 which	 gives	 release,	 in
pride	will	call	themselves	yogis.	But	they	are	not,	they	have	missed.	In	fact	the
right	word	for	them	is	yogabrashta,	“one	who	has	fallen	from	yoga.”
The	 fifth	 center	 is	 the	most	dangerous	 center.	You	cannot	 tickle	 any	other
center	–	that	is	the	danger	of	it.	You	cannot	tickle	the	swadhishthan,	you	cannot
tickle	the	manipura,	you	cannot	tickle	the	anahata;	they	are	beyond	you,	there
is	no	way	to	reach	them	and	tickle	them.	You	cannot	tickle	the	third	eye.	The
only	point	which	can	be	tickled	is	the	vishuddha,	your	throat	center,	because	it
is	available.	The	mouth	 is	open,	 it	 is	available,	and	 the	easiest	way	 is	 to	 turn
your	tongue	backward	and	tickle	it.
In	 yoga	 treatises	 you	 will	 find	 it	 described	 as	 something	 great;	 it	 is	 not,
beware	of	it.
This	 is	 the	 inner	map	of	Tantra	alchemy.	The	energy	can	start	moving	any
time;	 you	 just	 have	 to	 bring	 to	 your	 lovemaking	 a	 little	 meditation,	 a	 little
inwardness.	 Tantra	 is	 not	 against	 lovemaking,	 remember;	 let	 it	 be	 repeated
again	 and	 again.	 It	 is	 all	 for	 it,	 but	 not	 just	 for	 it;	 it	 is	 the	 first	 rung	 of	 the
ladder,	a	seven-runged	ladder.
Man	is	a	ladder.	The	first	rung	is	sex	and	the	seventh	rung	is	the	sahasrar	–
samadhi.	 The	 first	 rung	 joins	 you	 with	 samsara,	 the	 world,	 and	 the	 seventh
rung	 joins	 you	with	 nirvana,	 the	 beyond.	With	 the	 first	 rung,	 you	move	 in	 a
vicious	 circle	 of	 birth	 and	 death	 again	 and	 again;	 it	 is	 repetitive.	 With	 the
seventh	 rung,	 you	 go	 beyond	 birth	 and	 death.	 Life	 eternal	 is	 yours	 –	 the
kingdom	of	God.
	
PART	III:	CHAKRA	MEDITATIONS
	
Chapter	11:	OSHO	Chakra	Breathing	Meditation
	
This	active	meditation	uses	deep,	 rapid	breathing	and	body	movement	 to
open	 and	 bring	 awareness,	 vitality	 and	 silence	 to	 each	 of	 the	 seven
chakras*	and	thus	into	your	life.
The	accompanying	music	and	bells	energetically	support	 the	process	and
indicate	 the	 beginning	 of	 each	 stage.	 The	meditation	 is	 best	 done	 on	 an
empty	stomach.
	
*	All	chakras	lie	deep	within,	rather	than	on	the	surface	of	the	body.
The	following	“map”	is	used	to	indicate	their	approximate	locations:
1.	base	chakra:	the	sex	center,	lower	pelvis
2.	sacral	chakra:	just	below	the	navel
3.	solar	plexus	chakra:	above	the	navel,	below	the	breastbone
4.	heart	chakra:	the	middle	of	the	chest
5.	throat	chakra:	the	throat
6.	third-eye	chakra:	between	the	eyebrows
7.	crown	chakra:	top	of	the	head
	
This	meditation	 is	 to	 be	 done	with	 its	 specific	OSHO	Chakra	 Breathing
Meditation	music,	which	indicates	and	energetically	supports	the	different
stages.
INSTRUCTIONS
The	meditation	lasts	one	hour	and	has	two	stages.	Keep	your	eyes	closed	throughout.
	
FIRST	STAGE:	45	MINUTES
Stand	with	your	feet	a	little	apart,	your	body	loose	and	relaxed.	Close	your	eyes	and	with
open	mouth	 breathe	 deeply	 and	 rapidly	 into	 the	 first	 chakra	 –	 your	 attention	 with	 each
breath	in	the	pelvic	area,	where	the	first	chakra	is	located.	Have	equal	emphasis	on	the	in
and	the	out	breath.	Don’t	force	your	breathing,	breathe	in	a	rhythm	that	feels	comfortable
and	allows	you	to	become	aware	of	the	feelings	and	sensations	of	each	chakra.
Each	time	you	hear	a	bell,	move	this	deep,	rapid	breathing	up	to	the	next	chakra.	As	you
breathe	up	from	chakra	to	chakra,	 let	your	breathing	become	more	rapid	and	gentler,	so
that	you	are	taking	about	twice	as	many	breaths	in	the	seventh	chakra	than	in	the	first.
To	support	the	breathing	you	can	shake,	stretch,	rotate	or	move	your	body	and	hands	as
you	feel,	but	let	your	feet	stay	in	one	spot.	Allow	your	feet,	knees,	hips	and	other	joints	to
become	like	springs	so	that	once	you	set	the	breathing	and	body	in	motion,	the	movement
will	 become	 continuous	 and	 effortless.	 Let	 your	 awareness	 remain	 primarily	 with	 the
sensations	of	the	chakras,	rather	than	with	the	breathing	or	the	body	movement.
After	breathing	 in	 the	seventh	chakra,	you	will	hear	 three	bells.	Now	 let	your	breath	and
awareness	turn	and	fall	back	down	through	each	chakra,	allowing	your	breath	to	become
slower	 from	 chakra	 to	 chakra.	 Let	 the	 energy	 flow	 down	 by	 itself	 to	 include	 the	 entire
spectrum	of	chakra	energy	from	top	to	bottom,	like	seven	colors	blending	into	one	rainbow.
You	have	about	two	minutes	to	reach	back	to	the	first	chakra	and	it	is	up	to	you	how	long
you	breathe	into	each	chakra.
	
After	you	 finish	 this	sequence,	stand	silently	 for	a	 few	moments	before	starting	 the	next
sequence.	This	upward	and	downward	breathing	sequence	is	repeated	three	times.
If	at	first	you	don’t	feel	the	energy	of	your	chakras,	 just	breathe	into	the	area	where	they
are	 located.	 Remember	 not	 to	 push	 the	 breath	 –	 rather	 allow	 the	 breath	 and	 body
movement	to	be	like	a	bridge	carrying	you	into	the	sensations	and	energy	qualities	of	each
chakra.	Becoming	sensitive	to	this	comes	through	awareness	and	patience.
	
SECOND	STAGE:	15	MINUTES
After	 the	 third	 breathing	 sequence,	 sit	 relaxed	 and	 in	 silence.	 Remain	 a	 witness	 to
whatever	is	happening	within,	without	judgment.
	
Chapter	12:	OSHO	Chakra	Sounds	Meditation
	
This	meditation	can	be	done	at	any	time.	It	uses	vocal	sounds	to	open	and
harmonize	 the	 chakras*	 or	 energy	 centers	 while	 bringing	 awareness	 to
them.	It	can	bring	you	into	a	deep,	peaceful,	 inner	silence	either	through
making	your	own	vocal	sounds	or	by	just	listening	to	the	music	and	feeling
the	sounds	within	you.
	
*	All	chakras	lie	deep	within,	rather	than	on	the	surface	of	the	body.
The	following	“map”	is	used	to	indicate	their	approximate	locations:
1.	base	chakra:	the	sex	center,	lower	pelvis
2.	sacral	chakra:	just	below	the	navel
3.	solar	plexus	chakra:	above	the	navel,	below	the	breastbone
4.	heart	chakra:	the	middle	of	the	chest
5.	throat	chakra:	the	throat
6.	third-eye	chakra:	between	the	eyebrows
7.	crown	chakra:	top	of	the	head
	
This	 meditation	 is	 to	 be	 done	 with	 its	 specific	 OSHO	 Chakra	 Sounds
Meditation	music,	which	indicates	and	energetically	supports	the	different
stages.
INSTRUCTIONS
The	meditation	lasts	one	hour	and	has	two	stages.	Keep	your	eyes	closed	throughout.
	
FIRST	STAGE:	45	MINUTES
Stand,	 sit	 comfortably,	 or	 lie	down	 if	 you	prefer.	Keep	your	back	straight	and	your	body
loose.	Breathe	 into	 your	 belly	 rather	 than	 your	 chest.	 The	 sounds	 should	 be	made	with
your	mouth	open	and	your	jaw	loose,	keeping	your	mouth	open	the	whole	time.	Close	your
eyes	and	listen	to	the	music;	if	you	wish,	start	making	sounds	in	the	first	chakra.	You	can
make	a	single	tone	or	you	can	vary	the	tone.	Let	the	music	guide	you;	however,	you	can
be	creative	with	your	own	sounds.	While	listening	to	the	sound	of	the	music	or	the	sounds
that	you	make,	feel	the	sounds	pulsating	in	the	very	center	of	the	chakra,	even	if	it	seems
to	be	imagination	at	first.
Imagination	 can	 be	 used	 for	 "becoming	 attuned	 to	 something	 that	 is	 already	 there.”	 So
keep	 doing	 the	meditation	 even	 if	 it	 feels	 like	 you	may	 be	 imagining	 the	 chakras.	With
awareness,	your	imagination	can	lead	you	to	an	experience	of	the	inner	vibrations	of	each
center.
After	making	sounds	in	the	first	chakra,	you	will	hear	the	tones	change	to	a	higher	pitch	–
this	 is	the	indication	to	 listen	and	feel	sounds	in	the	second	chakra.	If	you	wish,	you	can
continue	 making	 sounds	 also.	 This	 process	 is	 repeated	 all	 the	 way	 up	 to	 the	 seventh
chakra.	As	you	move	from	chakra	to	chakra,	let	your	sounds	become	higher	in	pitch.
After	listening	to	and	making	sounds	in	the	seventh	chakra,	the	tones	will	descend	one	at	a
time	 down	 through	 all	 the	 chakras.	 As	 you	 hear	 the	 tones	 go	 down,	 listen	 and	 make
sounds	in	each	chakra.	Feel	the	inside	of	your	body	becoming	hollow	like	a	bamboo	flute,
allowing	the	sounds	to	resonate	from	the	top	of	your	head	down	to	the	very	base	of	your
trunk.
At	 the	end	of	 the	sequence,	you	will	hear	a	pause	before	the	next	sequence	starts.	This
upward	and	downward	movement	of	sound	will	be	repeated	 three	 times	 for	a	 total	of	45
minutes.
After	you	have	become	familiar	with	the	meditation,	you	can	add	another	dimension	to	 it
through	visualization	–	allowing	visual	images	to	appear	in	your	imagination	as	you	focus
on	each	chakra.	There	 is	no	need	 to	create	 images,	 just	be	receptive	 to	any	which	may
come.	 The	 images	 could	 be	 colors,	 patterns,	 or	 scenes	 of	 nature.	What	 comes	 to	 your
awareness	may	be	visual,	or	it	may	come	as	a	thought	–	for	example,	you	may	think	"gold"
or	you	may	see	color	in	your	imagination.
	
SECOND	STAGE:	15	MINUTES
After	 the	 last	 sound	 sequence,	 sit	 or	 lie	 down	with	 closed	 eyes.	Remain	 in	 silence	 and
don't	focus	on	anything	in	particular.	Become	aware	of	and	watch	whatever	is	happening
within	–	relaxed,	without	any	judgment,	remaining	a	witness.
	
Music	is	a	very	subtle	meditation.	The	seven	notes	of	music	are	concerned
with	 the	 seven	chakras	of	 the	body	and	each	chakra	has	 its	own	note.	 If	you
concentrate	on	that	chakra,	you	will	start	hearing	that	note	arising	within	your
body.	The	second	chakra	has	two	notes,	the	third,	three.	One	is	important,	the
other	two	are	just	part	of	it	but	create	a	harmony.	It	goes	on	becoming	a	greater
harmony,	 rising	 higher	 with	 each	 chakra.	 On	 the	 seventh	 chakra	 it	 is	 an
orchestra.
Each	chakra	has	its	own	form,	its	own	music,	 its	own	taste,	 its	own	smell.
The	 deeper	 you	 move	 inside	 yourself,	 the	 more	 you	 find	 the	 whole	 world
because	if	 it	 is	not	within	you,	you	cannot	see	 it	without	either.	Something	is
needed	to	correspond.
	
Chapter	13:	Online	Resources
	
YOUR	MOST	IMPORTANT	WEB	LINKS
	
Audio	 and	 video	 instructions	 for	 the	OSHO	Active	Meditations	 and	 other
OSHO	 Meditations	 are	 given	 on	 osho.com/meditation	 and	 on
imeditate.osho.com.	 For	 live	 participation	 options	 from	your	 home,	 log	 in
on:	imeditate.osho.com
	
About	Osho
	
	
Osho’s	unique	contribution	to	the	understanding	of	who	we	are	defies
categorization.	Mystic	and	scientist,	a	rebellious	spirit	whose	sole	interest	is	to
alert	humanity	to	the	urgent	need	to	discover	a	new	way	of	living.	To	continue	as
before	is	to	invite	threats	to	our	very	survival	on	this	unique	and	beautiful	planet.
His	essential	point	is	that	only	by	changing	ourselves,	one	individual	at	a	time,
can	the	outcome	of	all	our	“selves”	–	our	societies,	our	cultures,	our	beliefs,	our
world	–	also	change.	The	doorway	to	that	change	is	meditation.
Osho	the	scientist	has	experimented	and	scrutinized	all	the	approaches	of	the
past	and	examined	their	effects	on	the	modern	human	being	and	responded	to
their	shortcomings	by	creating	a	new	starting	point	for	the	hyperactive	21st
Century	mind:	OSHO	Active	Meditations.
Once	the	agitation	of	a	modern	lifetime	has	started	to	settle,	“activity”	can	melt
into	“passivity,”	a	key	starting	point	of	real	meditation.	To	support	this	next	step,
Osho	has	transformed	the	ancient	“art	of	listening”	into	a	subtle	contemporary
methodology:	the	OSHO	Talks.	Here	words	become	music,	the	listener	discovers
who	is	listening,	and	the	awareness	moves	from	what	is	being	heard	to	the
individual	doing	the	listening.	Magically,	as	silence	arises,	what	needs	to	be
heard	is	understood	directly,	free	from	the	distraction	of	a	mind	that	can	only
interrupt	and	interfere	with	this	delicate	process.
These	thousands	of	talks	cover	everything	from	the	individual	quest	for	meaning
to	the	most	urgent	social	and	political	issues	facing	society	today.	Osho’s	books
are	not	written	but	are	transcribed	from	audio	and	video	recordings	of	these
extemporaneous	talks	to	international	audiences.	As	he	puts	it,	“So	remember:
whatever	I	am	saying	is	not	just	for	you...I	am	talking	also	for	the	future
generations.”
Osho	has	been	described	by	The	Sunday	Times	in	London	as	one	of	the	“1000
Makers	of	the	20th	Century”	and	by	American	author	Tom	Robbinsas	“the	most
dangerous	man	since	Jesus	Christ.”	Sunday	Mid-Day	(India)	has	selected	Osho
as	one	of	ten	people	–	along	with	Gandhi,	Nehru	and	Buddha	–	who	have
changed	the	destiny	of	India.
About	his	own	work	Osho	has	said	that	he	is	helping	to	create	the	conditions	for
the	birth	of	a	new	kind	of	human	being.	He	often	characterizes	this	new	human
being	as	“Zorba	the	Buddha”	–	capable	both	of	enjoying	the	earthy	pleasures	of
a	Zorba	the	Greek	and	the	silent	serenity	of	a	Gautama	the	Buddha.
Running	like	a	thread	through	all	aspects	of	Osho’s	talks	and	meditations	is	a
vision	that	encompasses	both	the	timeless	wisdom	of	all	ages	past	and	the
highest	potential	of	today’s	(and	tomorrow’s)	science	and	technology.
Osho	is	known	for	his	revolutionary	contribution	to	the	science	of	inner
transformation,	with	an	approach	to	meditation	that	acknowledges	the
accelerated	pace	of	contemporary	life.	His	unique	OSHO	Active	Meditations™
are	designed	to	first	release	the	accumulated	stresses	of	body	and	mind,	so	that	it
is	then	easier	to	take	an	experience	of	stillness	and	thought-free	relaxation	into
daily	life.
	
Two	autobiographical	works	by	the	author	are	available:
Autobiography	of	a	Spiritually	Incorrect	Mystic,	St	Martins	Press,	New	York
(book	and	eBook)
Glimpses	of	a	Golden	Childhood,	OSHO	Media	International,	Pune,	India
	
	
OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort
www.osho.com/meditationresort
	
	
	
Each	year	the	OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort	welcomes	thousands	of
people	from	more	than	100	countries.	The	unique	campus	provides	an
opportunity	for	a	direct	personal	experience	of	a	new	way	of	living	–	with	more
awareness,	relaxation,	celebration	and	creativity.	A	great	variety	of	around-the-
clock	and	around-the-year	program	options	are	available.	Doing	nothing	and	just
relaxing	is	one	of	them!
All	programs	are	based	on	Osho’s	vision	of	“Zorba	the	Buddha”	–	a	qualitatively
new	kind	of	human	being	who	is	able	both	to	participate	creatively	in	everyday
life	and	to	relax	into	silence	and	meditation.
	
Location
Located	100	miles	southeast	of	Mumbai	in	the	thriving	modern	city	of	Pune,
India,	the	OSHO	International	Meditation	Resort	is	a	holiday	destination	with	a
difference.	The	Meditation	Resort	is	spread	over	28	acres	of	spectacular	gardens
in	a	beautiful	tree-lined	residential	area.
	
OSHO	Meditations
A	full	daily	schedule	of	meditations	for	every	type	of	person	includes	both
traditional	and	revolutionary	methods,	and	particularly	the	OSHO	Active
Meditations.	The	meditations	take	place	in	what	may	be	the	world’s	largest
meditation	hall,	the	OSHO	Auditorium.
	
OSHO	Multiversity
Individual	sessions,	courses	and	workshops	cover	everything	from	creative	arts
to	holistic	health,	personal	transformation,	relationship	and	life	transition,
transforming	meditation	into	a	lifestyle	for	life	and	work,	esoteric	sciences,	and
the	"Zen"	approach	to	sports	and	recreation.	The	secret	of	the	OSHO
Multiversity’s	success	lies	in	the	fact	that	all	its	programs	are	combined	with
meditation,	supporting	the	understanding	that	as	human	beings	we	are	far	more
than	the	sum	of	our	parts.
	
OSHO	Basho	Spa
The	luxurious	Basho	Spa	provides	for	leisurely	open-air	swimming	surrounded
by	trees	and	tropical	green.	The	uniquely	styled,	spacious	Jacuzzi,	the	saunas,
gym,	tennis	courts…all	these	are	enhanced	by	their	stunningly	beautiful	setting.
	
Cuisine
A	variety	of	different	eating	areas	serve	delicious	Western,	Asian	and	Indian
vegetarian	food	–	most	of	it	organically	grown	especially	for	the	Meditation
Resort.	Breads	and	cakes	are	baked	in	the	resort’s	own	bakery.
	
Night	life
There	are	many	evening	events	to	choose	from	–	dancing	being	at	the	top	of	the
list!	Other	activities	include	full-moon	meditations	beneath	the	stars,	variety
shows,	music	performances	and	meditations	for	daily	life.
Or	you	can	just	enjoy	meeting	people	at	the	Plaza	Café,	or	walking	in	the
nighttime	serenity	of	the	gardens	of	this	fairytale	environment.
	
Facilities
You	can	buy	all	your	basic	necessities	and	toiletries	in	the	Galleria.	The	OSHO
Multimedia	Gallery	sells	a	large	range	of	OSHO	media	products.	There	is	also	a
bank,	a	travel	agency	and	a	Cyber	Café	on-campus.	For	those	who	enjoy
shopping,	Pune	provides	all	the	options,	ranging	from	traditional	and	ethnic
Indian	products	to	all	of	the	global	brand-name	stores.
	
Accommodation
You	can	choose	to	stay	in	the	elegant	rooms	of	the	OSHO	Guesthouse,	or	for
longer	stays	on	campus	you	can	select	one	of	the	OSHO	Living-In	program
packages.	Additionally	there	is	a	plentiful	variety	of	nearby	hotels	and	serviced
apartments.
	
For	More	Information
	
OSHO.com/AllAboutOsho
A	full	selection	of	OSHO	multilingual	online	destinations
	
OSHO.com
The	official	website	of	OSHO	International
	
	
OSHO.com/Library
open	access	OSHO	library	for	your	favorite	topic	searches
	
OSHO.com/Newsletter
monthly	newsletter
	
OSHO.com/Meditation
about	the	OSHO	meditations	and	related	music
	
Facebook.com/OSHO.International
	
Facebook.com/OSHO.International.Meditation.Resort
	
Twitter.com/OSHO
	
YouTube.com/OSHOInternational
	
OSHOtalks.info
OSHO	video	translation	project
	
Thank	you	for	buying	this	OSHO	eBook.
	
