1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Golden	Wind
Talks	given	from	1/7/80	to	31/1/80
Darshan	Diary
31	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007015
ShortTitle:	GWIND01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	only	way	to	know	god,	to	feel	god,	is	meditation.	Meditation	means	a	state
of	consciousness	when	all	thoughts	have	been	dropped.
The	Zen	masters	call	the	state	of	meditation	the	season	of	autumn,	when	all	the
leaves	fall	and	the	trees	are	standing	bare,	naked.	When	consciousness	drops	all
thoughts	it	is	like	a	tree	without	leaves,	without	foliage,	exposed	to	the	wind,	to
the	moon,	to	the	sun,	to	the	rain	uncovered,	unhidden.	In	that	exposure	there	is
communion	with	god.	That	communion	is	love.	In	that	communion	one	becomes
a	beloved	of	god.
There	is	a	very	famous	Zen	koan.	A	monk	asked	a	great	master,	Ummon,	"What
will	happen	when	the	leaves	fall	and	the	trees	become	bare?"	Zen	people	always
ask	questions	 indirectly	because	 life	 is	such	a	mystery,	you	have	 to	be	delicate
about	 it,	 you	 cannot	 ask	 directly...	 To	 be	 direct	 appears	 to	 be	 aggressive	 and
violent;	hence	Zen	has	created	beautiful	metaphors.	Now	this	is	a	metaphor:	the
monk	is	asking	"What	happens	when	meditation	happens?",	but	not	so	directly.
He	 is	 asking	 in	 a	 more	 poetic	 way;	 not	 so	 mathematically,	 but	 more
metaphorically.
He	 says,	 "What	will	 happen	when	 the	 leaves	 fall	 and	 the	 trees	 become	bare?"
Ummon	simply	said,	"The	golden	wind."	This	is	the	whole	story,	but	all	has	been
asked	and	all	has	been	said;	nothing	more	is	needed.
The	monk	bowed	down,	touched	the	feet	of	the	master	and	thanked	him	for	his
great	insight	and	compassion.
In	autumn	the	breeze	is	very	cool,	very	fresh,	very	rejuvenating,	and	when	all	the
leaves	 have	 fallen	 and	 are	 fluttering,	 all	 those	 yellow	 leaves	 create	 a	 golden
atmosphere.	They	make	even	the	wind	golden!
Although	 the	wind	remains	uncolored,	you	can	feel	 the	song	of	 the	 leaves,	 the
dance	of	the	leaves,	the	joy	of	the	leaves,	and	you	can	see	the	wind	enjoying	the
whole	dance.
Once	a	Zen	master	was	teaching	the	art	of	gardening	to	the	king	of	Japan.	After
three	years	of	 teaching	he	 said,	 "Now	 I	will	 come	and	 see	your	garden	 --	 that
will	be	the	examination	of	what	you	have	done	in	these	three	years."	And	he	told
him	before	 that	 "Whatsoever	 you	 are	 learning	 go	 on	 practising	 in	 your	 palace
garden,	any	day	I	may	come."
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 king	 had	 prepared	 the	 garden	 and	 he	 was	 waiting	 for	 that	 great	 day;	 he
rejoiced	 that	 the	 day	 had	 come.	 For	 those	 three	 years	 he	 had	 used	 nearly	 one
thousand	gardeners	to	implement	everything	in	the	minutest	detail.	And	for	that
whole	day	and	night	--	because	tomorrow	morning	the	master	would	be	there	--
the	 garden	was	 cleaned,	 everything	was	 put	 exactly	 right,	 as	 it	 should	 be,	 no
error,	no	mistake...
The	master	came.	The	king	was	very	happy	because	whatsoever	the	master	had
said	 had	been	 absolutely	 fulfilled;	 it	was	 impossible	 to	 find	 any	 fault.	But	 the
master	looked	at	the	garden	and	became	very	serious	--
which	was	not	natural	to	the	master.	He	was	a	man	of	laughter.	He	became	sad.
As	they	moved	into	the	garden	he	became	more	and	more	serious	and	the	king
started	 feeling	 a	 little	 trembling	 inside:	Was	 he	 going	 to	 fail?	What	 had	 gone
wrong?	The	silence	of	the	master	was	too	heavy.
Finally	the	king	asked,	"What	is	the	matter?	I	have	never	seen	you	so	serious.	I
was	 thinking	 you	 would	 be	 immensely	 happy	 that	 your	 disciple	 had	 worked
hard."
The	master	said,	"Everything	is	right	but	where	are	the	golden	leaves?	I	don't	see
any	dead	 leaves,	 yellow	 leaves	 fluttering	 in	 the	wind.	Without	 that	 the	 garden
looks	 dead;	 there	 is	 no	 song,	 no	 dance.	 Without	 that	 the	 garden	 looks	 very
artificial.
The	king	had	 removed	all	 the	dead	 leaves,	not	only	 from	 the	ground	but	 even
from	the	plants	and	trees.
He	had	never	thought	of	it,	that	death	is	also	part	of	life,	that	it	is	not	its	opposite
but	its	complementary,	that	without	it	there	would	be	no	life.	And	certainly	the
master	 was	 right:	 Yes,	 the	 garden	was	 beautiful,	 but	 it	 looked	 as	 if	 it	 were	 a
painting,	not	alive.
The	master	said,	"The	golden	wind	is	missing.	Where	is	Ummon's	golden	wind?
Bring	the	golden	wind!"	The	master	took	a	bucket	and	went	out	of	the	garden,
outside	 the	 gate	 to	 where	 all	 the	 leaves	 have	 been	 thrown.	 He	 collected	 the
leaves	in	the	bucket,	came	back	and	threw	the	leaves	on	the	path.	Suddenly	the
wind	 started	 blowing	 them	here	 and	 there,	 and	 there	was	 noise	 and	 there	was
music,	 and	 there	was	 dance.	The	master	 said,	 "Now	 there	 is	 life!	The	wind	 is
golden	again."
This	is	Ummon's	golden	wind:	when	all	thoughts	fall	down	from	your	mind	and
your	 consciousness	 stands	 absolutely	 bare	 and	 naked.	 Deep	 down	 near	 your
roots	the	wind	is	blowing	and	all	your	thoughts	are	fluttering	far	away	from	you,
no	more	part	of	you.	They	still	 remain	 there,	 they	don't	go	anywhere,	but	 they
are	no	more	part	of	you.	You	have	transcended;	you	are	standing	above	them,	a
watcher	on	the	hills.	That's	what	meditation	is.
Meditation	 is	 not	 against	 thought;	 it	 is	 for	 transcendence,	 it	 is	 going	 beyond
thoughts.	 It	 is	 becoming	 so	 utterly	 naked	 that	 you	 can	 be	 seen	 by	 god	 as	 you
really	are:	with	no	masks,	with	no	garments,	 just	 like	a	small	child.	And	 these
are	the	great	moments	of	life,	when	love	starts	showering	from	the	beyond	and
one	becomes	a	beloved	of	god.	But	one	has	to	earn	it,	one	has	to	be	worthy	of	it,
one	has	to	deserve	it.
That	earning	comes	through	meditation.	Meditation	prepares	you	to	receive	love.
God	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 give	 it,	 but	we	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 receive	 it,	we	 are	 not
empty	enough	to	receive	it.	We	are	so	full	of	rubbish,	we	are	so	full	of	thoughts,
desires,	memories,	dreams,	that	there	is	no	space	within	us.	That	space	has	to	be
created.	That	 is	 the	art	of	meditation:	 to	create	 inner	 space.	And	 then	you	will
start	dancing	in	the	golden	wind.
Love	is	the	ultimate	godly	experience.	Love	proves	that	existence	is	not	without
meaning,	 that	 life	 has	 significance.	Except	 for	 love	 there	 is	 no	 proof	 for	 life's
significance.	 If	 one	 has	 not	 experienced	 love	 one	 will	 feel	 meaningless,
accidental,	just	driftwood,	at	the	mercy	of	unknown,	unconscious,	natural	forces.
That's	 how	 materialists	 look	 at	 life:	 just	 a	 combination	 of	 matter,	 just	 a	 by-
product	 of	 matter,	 an	 epiphenomenon.	 But	 then	 there	 is	 no	 significance,	 and
without	significance	one	can	only	drag,	one	cannot	dance.	Without	significance
only	 cowards	 can	 live.	 The	 courageous	 one	 will	 commit	 suicide,	 they	 will
commit	hara-kiri.
The	existentialistic	philosophers	must	be	cowards	because	they	go	on	saying	that
life	 is	meaningless,	 still	 they	go	on	clinging	 to	 life.	 If	 life	 is	meaningless	 then
why	should	one	live?	For	what?	If	it	is	all	going	to	end	in	nothingness,	if	matter
is	going	to	disappear	into	matter	and	there	is	going	to	be	no	outcome	of	it,	then
why	all	this	anguish,	anxiety,	despair,	struggle?	And	these	are	all	the	themes	of
existentialists:	 anguish,	 anxiety,	despair,	 fear,	death.	 If	 life	 is	meaningless	 then
why	 should	one	be	worried	 about	 death?	One	 should	 rejoice!	Then	 to	 commit
suicide	should	be	 the	only	worthwhile	act,	 the	first	and	the	 last.	But	 they	don't
commit	suicide;	they	go	on	talking	about	the	meaninglessness	of	life.	In	fact	this
very	talk	becomes	their	purpose.
One	great	philosopher,	Zeno,	lived	a	very	long	life	--	more	than	ninety	years	--
and	for	his	whole	life	he	was	teaching	that	life	is	meaningless.	In	fact	it	is	said
that	a	few	fools	committed	suicide	in	following	his	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ideas;	he	was	a	very	convincing	man.	When	he	was	on	his	deathbed	somebody
said,	 "This	 is	 very	 strange,	 that	 you	 lived	 ninety	 years	 and	 many	 of	 your
followers	 have	 committed	 suicide	 following	 your	 ideas.	 Why	 did	 you	 not
commit	 suicide?	He	 said,	 "I	 had	 to	 live	 so	 that	 I	 could	 teach	my	philosophy."
Now	that	was	his	only	purpose:	to	teach	philosophy,	to	teach	this	philosophy	that
life	is	meaningless.	It	was	as	if	that	became	his	meaning.
No,	nobody	really	agrees	--	not	even	the	existentialists	who	go	on	saying	that	life
is	meaningless	really	agree	with	their	own	philosophy.	Deep	down	they	are	still
doubting:	 there	may	be	 some	meaning.	Perhaps	we	have	not	discovered	 it	yet.
Who	know?	--	maybe	tomorrow	we	will	stumble	upon	it.	We	may	not	have	come
across	 it	up	 to	now	but	 it	can	happen	tomorrow.	So	let	us	wait,	 live	and	go	on
searching.
Nobody	 really	 becomes	 convinced	 that	 life	 is	meaningless	 because	 life	 is	 not
meaningless;	 it	 has	 intrinsic	 value,	 but	 it	 has	 to	 be	 discovered.	 We	 are
unconsciously,	 intuitively,	 instinctively	 aware	 of	 it.	We	 have	 just	 a	 hunch	 that
there	is	--	there	is	bound	to	be	some	meaning	--	but	we	are	not	clear	about	it.	It
has	not	come	to	light;	we	don't	have	any	proofs	for	it.	Love	gives	us	proofs	for	it.
A	lover	has	no	doubts	about	life's	meaningfulness,	 its	significance,	 its	 joy.	It	 is
only	 through	 love	 that	 people	 have	 slowly	 slowly	 discovered	 the	 ultimate
meaning,	god.	It	is	only	through	love	they	have	discovered	the	whole	science	of
meditation	because	in	loving	moments,	mind	stops.	When	you	are	really	in	love,
in	those	moments	you	don't	think.	The	past	disappears,	the	future	disappears,	the
present	 becomes	 all	 and	 all	 --	 and	 that's	what	meditation	 is.	Love	gives	 you	 a
glimpse	 of	 meditation,	 and	 through	 meditation	 a	 window	 opens	 into	 the
existence	of	god;	hence	I	call	love	the	most	godly	phenomenon	on	earth.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	meditators	and	lovers	and	together,	because	both	are
supportive	energies	for	each	other.	If	you	love,	you	will	be	able	to	meditate	more
deeply;	if	you	meditate	you	will	be	able	to	love	more	totally,	and	so	on,	so	forth.
They	 go	 on	 helping	 each	 other;	 they	 are	 very	 supporting.	 Slowly	 slowly	 a
pyramid	is	created	in	your	consciousness.	By	the	bricks	of	love	and	meditation
one	can	reach	the	highest	peak	of	existence.
The	man	who	knows	only	meditation	 is	missing	 something,	 and	 the	man	who
knows	only	love	is	also	missing	something.	The	whole	man	knows	both;	he	has
both	aspects	of	the	coin	in	his	hands.	He	has	all	that	is	valuable	within	him.	His
life	becomes	an	exquisite	phenomenon,	a	beautiful	song,	a	graceful	experience.
He	lives	on	the	earth	but	he	is	part	of	the	sky.	He	is	a	miracle,	he	is	a	paradox,
but	in	his	paradoxicalness	he	is	whole	--	and	to	be	whole	is	to	be	holy.	That	is
my	definition	of	a	holy	man.
Esther	has	two	meanings;	one	comes	from	Hebrew	and	the	other	from	Persian	--
both	are	significant.
The	Hebrew	meaning	is	a	plant	with	white	flowers;	it	symbolises	love.
White	 flowers	 have	 always	 symbolised	 the	 purest,	 the	 most	 innocent
phenomenon.	White	means	innocence	and	white	also	means	totality.	Every	other
colour	 is	only	one	aspect	of	white.	When	all	 colours	are	mixed	 together	white
arises.	When	white	is	divided	into	all	its	components	then	the	seven	colours,	the
whole	 spectrum	 of	 colours	 becomes	 available.	 That's	 how	 the	 rainbow	 comes
into	existence.
In	the	rainy	season,	when	small	drops	of	rain-water	are	hanging	in	the	air,	if	the
sun	rises,	the	rays	pass	through	those	hanging	drops	of	water	and	those	drops,	at
a	particular	angle,	start	functioning	like	prisms:	they	start	dividing	the	white	ray
into	seven	colours.	That's	how	the	rainbow	arises.
All	colours	are	parts	or	white.	Black	represents	no	colour;	it	represents	absence,
negativity,	 hence	 it	 has	 become	 the	 symbol	 of	 death.	 White	 represents	 all
colours,	positivity,	hence	it;	is	the	symbol	of	love.
Love	 is	 a	 rainbow,	 a	 multi-splendoured	 experience,	 a	 multi-dimensional
phenomenon.	That	meaning	is	beautiful.	To	attain	to	love	is	to	attain	to	bliss	--
they	come	together.	Without	love	there	is	no	bliss,	without	bliss	there	is	no	love.
They	never	 come	alone,	 they	 cannot	 come	alone	 --	 they	 are	 inseparable.	They
are	two	names	of	the	same	thing.
And	the	Persian	meaning	is	a	star.	That	too	is	beautiful.	Love	is	a	star.	It	is	the
only	star	 in	 the	darkness	of	 life,	 in	 the	darkness	of	 the	night.	 If	one	can	go	on
remembering	love	one	can	pass	through	this	whole	dark	night	of	the	soul.
Become	 blissful,	 become	 more	 loving,	 and	 your	 inner	 being	 will	 become	 a
source	of	light,	a	star.	Your	inner	being	will	also	become	a	garden	full	of	white
flowers.	And	unless	one	blooms	one	never	feels	fulfilled,	one	never	knows	what
contentment	 is.	And	not	 to	know	contentment,	 fulfilment,	 is	 to	miss	 the	whole
point	of	life.
Truth	is	known	only	through	a	deep	inner	harmony.	Ordinarily	we	are	a	chaos,
very	discordant.	There	is	not	one	person	in	us	but	many.	We	are	multi-psychic;
there	are	many	minds	inside,	and	they	are	all	dragging	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
us	 in	 different	 directions	 --	 many	 voices	 and	 you	 cannot	 figure	 out	 which	 is
yours.	One	voice	says	'Do	this,'
another	 voice	 says,	 'Don't	 do	 this.'	One	 is	 constantly	wavering.	One	 is	 almost
broken	 into	 thousands	 of	 pieces	 like	 a	 mirror	 thrown	 on	 the	 floor.	 That's	 the
situation	where	man	finds	himself.	But	all	those	fragments	can	be	gathered.	They
can	be	melted	into	one	whole;	they	can	be	integrated,	crystallised.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	it	is	the	science	of	crystallising	your	fragments
into	one	organic	unity.
The	moment	that	unity	arises	in	you,	great	music	is	born,	all	noises	change	into
an	orchestra,	 and	 then	only	 can	you	 see,	 hear,	 feel	 the	 truth	 of	 existence.	 It	 is
always	there	but	our	minds	are	so	noisy	that	we	cannot	feel	it.
The	moment	 this	 inner	chaos	 is	gone	we	can	hear	 the	still,	 small	voice	within.
And	 then	 indubitably,	 unmistakably	 one	 knows,	 'This	 is	My	voice,	 this	 is	 god
speaking	in	me!'	And	there	is	never	any	doubt.	Even	if	the	whole	world	doubts
it,	you	will	not	doubt	it:	it	is	indubitable.	Only	on	that	rock	of	indubitability,	on
that	 rock	 of	 certainty,	 can	 life	 become	 a	 temple	 --	 otherwise	 we	 are	 simply
making	sand-castles.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007025
ShortTitle:	GWIND02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
In	Celtic	mythology	Birthe	is	the	daughter	of	the	goddess	of	wisdom	and	song.
This	is	a	very	significant	symbol:	it	is	very	rare	to	find	in	any	other	mythology
the	combination	of	wisdom	and	song.
Ordinarily	 nobody	 thinks	 of	 them	 together	 --	 and	 in	 reality	 they	 are	 together.
Wisdom	 is	 a	 song.	 It	 is	 not	 seriousness,	 it	 is	 playfulness;	 it	 is	 not	 sad,	 it	 is
celebrating.	 And	 unless	 wisdom	 is	 a	 song	 it	 is	 not	 true.	 Then	 it	 is	 only
knowledge	 mere	 knowledge.	 It	 is	 only	 pretending	 to	 be	 wisdom.	 But	 real
wisdom	 that	 can	 also	 become	 a	 song,	 that	 ultimately	 becomes	 a	 song,	 is	 born
only	out	of	meditation.	Where	is	no	other	way.
Meditation	simply	means	 the	art	of	 inward	 journeying.	We	are	perfectly	aware
how	to	go	into	the	outside	world,	how	to	reach	others.	We	have	become	capable
of	 travelling	 long	distances	very	easily;	we	have	reached	 the	moon,	walked	on
the	moon.	But	the	people	who	walked	on	the	moon	had	no	idea	who	they	were;
they	had	not	even	penetrated	the	first	layer	of	their	inner	being.	They	had	gone
so	far	away,	and	they	had	taken	a	great	risk.	It	was	risky,	it	was	dangerous.	It	was
a	miracle	that	nothing	went	wrong.	There	was	every	possibility	that	they	would
not	go	back	on	the	earth	again.	Anything	could	have	gone	wrong:	it	was	a	first
attempt	to	land	human	beings	on	the	moon.	But	they	had	never	tried	to	go	in,	and
they	may	never	try	to	go	in;	the	idea	may	not	occur	to	them.
People	take	themselves	for	granted	--	that	is	the	difficulty,	They	think	they	know
themselves	already.
and	 the	 reality	 of	 one's	 being	 is	 the	 most	 mysterious	 phenomenon,	 the	 most
unknown	and	unknowable.
Meditation	 is	 the	 art	 of	 landing	 you	 at	 your	 very	 centre.	 We	 live	 on	 the
circumference	--	how	to	jump	from	the	circumference	to	the	centre?	It	is	a	whole
art.	I	call	it	art	rather	than	science	because	science	is	more	mathematical	and	art
is	 more	 artistic,	 more	 poetic.	 In	 science	 there	 are	 no	 exceptions,	 it	 follows
universal	 laws.	 In	art	 there	are	exceptions.	 In	 fact	 every	 individual	 reaches	his
centre	in	a	slightly	different	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
way	anybody	else,	because	each	individual	has	something	unique	in	him.	What
is	 the	 divinity	 and	 the	 great	 grace	 of	 the	 universe,	 that	 it	 makes	 unique
individuals	only.
Meditation	is	the	bridge	between	the	circumference	and	the	centre,	between	the
outer	 and	 the	 inner,	 between	 mind	 and	 no-mind,	 between	 matter	 and
consciousness.
Learn	 the	art	of	meditation.	My	whole	emphasis	 is	on	meditation.	 I	don't	want
my	sannyasins	to	become	addicted	to	any	other	details	of	discipline,	of	food....
Where	 are	 a	 thousand	 and	 one	 things	 people	 become	 anxious	 about,	 worried
about	--	what	to	eat,	what	not	to	eat,	how	much	to	sleep,	when	to	get	up,	when	to
go	to	bed?	They	are	all	nonessential	things.	The	only	essential	thing	is	to	know
oneself.	And	 the	person	who	wants	 to	know	himself	will	naturally	 arrange	his
life	 in	such	a	way	that	 it	helps.	Slowly	slowly	he	will	change	his	food	without
any	 effort,	 without	 any	 enforcement.	 He	will	 start	 becoming	 alert	 about	 what
food	helps	him	to	be	more	silent.	Just	by	watching	one	knows	what	 is	healthy,
what	 is	 unhealthy,	what	 gives	 you	 cramps	 in	 the	 stomach	 and	what	 gives	 you
heaviness,	 what	 makes	 you	 sleepy,	 what	 makes	 you	 alert,	 aware,	 light,	 what
makes	you	sad	and	what	makes	you	joyous.
Through	watching,	the	meditator	slowly	becomes	aware	of	what	is	the	right	time
for	him	 to	 sleep,	and	what	 is	 the	 right	 time	 for	him	 to	get	up...	And	 it	will	be
different	for	everybody.	That's	why	I	don't	want	to	prescribe	any	rules,	because
there	are	people	who	are	day	people	and	there	are	people	who	are	night	people.
The	day	people	are	more	alive	in	the	day,	in	the	night	they	slow	down.	The	night
people	 are	 not	 so	 alive	 in	 the	 days	 they	 start	 becoming	 alive	 as	 the	 sun	 goes
down.	Evening	is	their	real	time,	and	as	the	night	progresses	they	become	more
lively,	now	the	same	rule	cannot	be	prescribed	for	both.	Everybody	has	to	find
by	experimentation,	by	awareness,	what	is	right	and	wrong	for	him;	and	it	is	not
for	anybody	else.
But	one	 thing	 is	 for	 everybody,	 for	 all	 sannyasins	 --	 and	 that	 is	meditation.	 In
fact	by	watching	your	habits,	your	life-style,	your	food,	your	sleep,	the	way	you
talk,	the	way	you	walk,	you	are	learning	meditation,	because	watching	is	the	key.
If	first	you	can	start	watching	outer	things	then	you	come	a	little	closer:	you	start
watching	your	thoughts,	then	a	little	closer	and	you	start	watching	your	emotions
--	you	are	already	moving	in,	the	meditation	has	started.	When	only	the	watcher
is	 left	and	 there	 is	nothing	 to	watch,	you	have	arrived	home.	That's	 the	centre.
Suddenly	great	light	explodes,	all	darkness	disappears,	and	with	it	all	misery,	all
death.
Meditation	makes	you	aware	of	great	music	--	music	without	and	music	within.
It	 is	 there,	but	we	are	not	alert,	we	are	not	awake,	hence	we	go	on	missing	 it,
otherwise	the	whole	existence	is	nothing	but	music.
That	music	 is	called	 'god'	by	 the	mystics.	God	 is	not	a	person	but	 the	ultimate
harmony	of	existence;	 it	 is	 an	orchestra.	Everything	 is	 in	 tune	with	everything
else.	The	trees	are	in	tune	with	the	earth,	the	earth	is	in	tune	with	the	wind,	the
wind	is	in	tune	with	the	sky,	the	sky	is	in	tune	with	the	stars,	and	so	on,	so	forth.
There	 is	 no	hierarchy.	Even	 the	 smallest	 blade	of	 erass	 is	 as	 significant	 as	 the
biggest	 star.	 They	 both	 contribute	 to	 the	 orchestra	 of	 existence.	 They	 both
enhance	it,	enrich	it.
Everything	is	going	on	in	such	deep	accord,	but	man	remains	unaware	of	it.	That
unawareness	becomes	his	misery	and	he	starts	suffering	from	his	own	invented
nightmares.	 Otherwise	 life	 is	 a	 celebration,	 it	 is	 a	 constant	 celebration,	 a
continuum,	a	non-ending	festival.	We	just	have	to	become	a	little	more	silent	to
be	able	to	hear	 it.	And	when	we	are	absolutely	silent,	not	only	silent	but	when
we	 are	 silence	 --	 then	 we	 disappear,	 then	 we	 are	 part	 of	 this	 whole	 cosmic
harmony.	That	 is	 the	meeting	of	man	with	god,	of	 the	part	with	the	whole.	We
disappear	in	one	sense,	we	dissolve	in	one	sense	--	as	an	ego,	as	a	person	--	but
we	become	the	whole,	so	in	another	sense	we	are	for	the	first	time.	The	dewdrop
disappears	but	becomes	the	ocean.	It	is	not	a	loser,	it	loses	nothing.	It	loses	only
its	 small	boundaries	which	were	not	worth	keeping.	 In	 fact	 they	were	creating
this	whole	trouble:	the	fear,	the	trembling,	the	constant	fear	that	the	sun	will	rise
and	it	will	disappear,	it	will	die.
Mahavira	has	said	that	man's	life	lived	as	an	ego	is	just	like	a	dewdrop	hanging
on	a	blade	of	grass,	constantly	afraid.
Just	 a	 small	 breeze	 and	 that's	 the	 end:	 the	 dewdrop	 falls	 into	 the	 earth	 and
disappears.	 Or	 soon	 the	 morning	 will	 be	 there	 and	 the	 sun	 will	 rise	 and	 the
dewdrop	will	 evaporate.	How	can	one	 live	 surrounded	by	 so	much	death?	All
our	boundaries	are	in	fact	drawn	by	our	death;	we	are	defined	by	our	death.	The
moment	we	 lose	 our	 boundaries	we	 lose	 our	 death	 too.	When	we	 are	 eternal,
then	when	we	are	infinite.
Remember	that	meditation	is	succeeding	if	you	become	more	and	more	alert	of
the	great	music	that	is	always	there	--	it	just	needs	a	sympathetic	ear.	Meditation
creates	that	ear,	that	heart.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	 is	 a	 very	 paradoxical	 experience.	 In	 one	 sense	 it	 takes	 away	 your
personality,	 and	 it	 takes	 it	 away	 in	 toto;	 it	 leaves	 not	 even	 a	 trace	 of	 your
personality.	And	it	is	our	personality	that	we	think	makes	us	unique;	it	is	not	our
personality	that	makes	us	unique.	But	we	are	afraid	of	losing	our	personality,	our
identity,	 because	 then	we	will	 be	 nobody	 --	 and	 this	 is	 our	 uniqueness,	 this	 is
what	makes	us	special,	this	is	our	definition.
In	 the	 first	 place	 personality	 is	 not	 a	 reality;	 it	 is	 a	 mask.	 The	 very	 word
'personality'	comes	from
'persona',	persona	means	a	mask.	In	Greek	theatre	actors	used	to	wear	masks	--
those	 masks	 were	 called	 persona	 --	 and	 while	 they	 wore	 masks	 they	 had	 a
personality.
We	are	all	wearing	masks.	They	are	not	our	reality	--	just	faces	imposed	upon	the
original	face.
Meditation	will	take	away	all	your	false	faces	--	that's	the	fear,	that's	why	many
people	want	to	meditate	but	never	meditate,	they	only	talk	about	meditation	but
never	 take	 the	 jump	 into	 it,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 they	 are	 scared	 to	 lose	 their
persona,	their	mask.	That's	all	they	have.	And	they	have	become	accustomed	to
it:	they	only	know	themselves	through	it.
On	 the	 other	 hand,	 if	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 risk	 the	 mask,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you
discover	 your	 real	 uniqueness,	 your	 individuality.	 Individuality	 is	 totally
different	 from	 personality.	 The	 word	 'individuality'	 comes	 from	 a	 root	 which
means	 indivisible:	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 divided,	 that	 which	 cannot	 be
dismantled,	disintegrated.
Meditation	 takes	 away	 your	 personality	 and	 makes	 you	 aware	 of	 your
individuality.	That	individuality	is	unique;	it	belongs	only	to	you	and	to	nobody
else.	There	has	never	been	any	individual	like	you	and	there	will	never	be	again,
because	god	never	repeats.	He	always	creates	unique	individuals.
And	this	is	not	only	true	about	human	beings,	this	is	so	about	everything.	Go	to
the	sea	beach	and	try	to	find	two	pebbles	exactly	the	same	and	you	will	not	be
able	 to.	Or	go	 into	 the	garden	and	 try	 to	 find	 two	 leaves	exactly	 the	same	and
you	will	not	be	able	 to.	 It	 is	not	only	 that	your	 thumb	impression	is	unique,	 in
fact,	everything	 in	existence	 is	unique.	But	we	go	on	biding	our	 reality	behind
many	many	curtains	and	we	become	lost	in	our	own	inventions,	in	our	own	lies.
Meditation	is	the	discovery	of	the	truth.	Of	course	one	has	to	sacrifice	many	lies,
but	you	don't	lose	anything,	you	gain.	With	every	lie	sacrificed	a	little	bit	of	truth
is	discovered.	And	when	you	have	discovered	your	whole	truth	you	have	found
god.
There	is	no	other	paradise	except	when	you	achieve	the	state	of	no-mind.	Mind
is	 hell	 and	 no-mind	 is	 heaven.	 Hell	 and	 heaven	 are	 not	 geographical;	 hell	 is
psychological	and	heaven	is	spiritual.
People	have	been	continuously	looking	for	a	geographical	hell	and	heaven.	They
are	only	metaphors,	and	one	should	not	stretch	metaphors	too	far,	otherwise	they
lose	 all	meaning.	 That's	 what	 has	 happened,	 and	 it	 has	 happened	 all	 over	 the
world,	 in	 almost	 all	 the	 religions:	 beautiful	 metaphors	 stretched	 too	 far	 have
become	ugly.
Now	there	are	maps	of	hell,	of	heaven,	available,	and	it	is	really	strange	that	we
were	not	able	to	make	maps	of	the	earth.	Those	were	made	just	a	few	centuries
ago,	but	 there	are	 five-thousand-year-old	maps	of	heaven	and	hell.	 It	was	easy
because	it	 is	all	 imagination;	you	can	make	anything	out	of	imagination;	hence
the	Christians'	 heaven	 is	 different	 and	 the	Hindus'	 heaven	 is	 different	 and	 the
Mohammedan's	 heaven	 is	 different.	 They	 are	 bound	 to	 be	 different:	 different
peoples'imagination	works	in	a	different	way.
The	Tibetan	heaven	cannot	be	cool;	 they	are	so	 tired	of	 the	cold	--	 it	 is	warm.
The	 Indian	 heaven	 cannot	 be	warm;	 they	 are	 so	 tired	 of	 the	 heat	 --	 it	 is	 cool.
Now	 how	 can	 they	 agree	 about	 that?	 An	 Indian	 heaven	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 air-
conditioned.	 The	 Indian	 hell	 is	 full	 of	 fire,	 naturally	 --	 that's	 how	 India	 is
suffering.	We	know	that's	how	hell	should	be	more	fire,	fire	and	fire,	all	flame,
everywhere.	 From	 where	 do	 they	 go	 on	 getting	 all	 this	 gas	 and	 kerosene?	 --
nobody	knows!	For	eternity	they	have	been	burning	hell-fire.	And	it	cannot	be	a
small	thing:	millions	of	people	are	thrown	into	hell.	And	the	whole	work	consists
of	one	thing:	just	cooking	them'	And	they	are	not	owed	to	die	either,	because	if
they	die	they	are	freed	from	suffering,	and	they	have	to	be	there	for	eternity.	And
the	whole	work	consists	of	this.	That	may	be	the	cause	of	the	scarcity	of	petrol
and	 kerosene.	 Hell	 is	 somewhere	 deep	 down,	 so	 they	 have	 shut	 off	 all	 petrol
going	towards	hell.
And	it	must	be	easy	there:	you	just	put	a	pipe	down	and	the	petrol	starts	flowing.
To	pump	it	up	is	difficult!
This	 is	 just	 imagination.	There	 is	 certainly	 something	 like	hell,	but	 it	 exists	 in
you.	And	you	are	 the	creator	of	 it,	your	mind	 is	 the	cause	of	 it.	 If	you	can	go
beyond	the	mind	you	go	beyond	hell,	you	go	beyond	suffering.
Meditation	 is	 the	way	of	 transcendence.	And	life	can	be	sheer	 joy.	There	 is	no
reason	why	one	should	suffer.	If	we	are	suffering	we	are	creating	it.
My	sannyasins	have	to	accept	total	responsibility	for	their	suffering,	because	it	is
in	that	acceptance	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
we	become	masters	of	our	own	hell.	Then	we	of	course	can	get	out	of	it;	there	is
nobody	who	 is	preventing	us.	No	devil,	 no	 satan	 is	 the	master	of	 it	 --	we	are!
Throwing	responsibility	on	somebody	else	--	on	fate,	on	kismet	--	is	just	a	trick
of	 the	mind.	So	you	go	on	creating	your	own	hell	but	you	go	on	 throwing	 the
responsibility	on	other	peoples'	shoulders,	and	the	vicious	circle	continues.
Once	we	 accept	 that	 we	 are	 the	 cause	 of	 our	 own	misery,	 half	 the	 journey	 is
already	complete.	Then	the	other	half	is	not	more	difficult,	it	is	less	difficult;	the
first	 half	 is	 the	most	 difficult	 part.	 The	 same	 energy	 can	 be	 used	 for	 creating
paradise.
Knowledge	is	learned	from	others.	Wisdom	has	to	be	discovered	within	oneself.
Knowledge	 comes	 through	 studying	 scriptures,	 accumulating	 information	 from
all	possible	sources.	But	wisdom	is	not	information,	wisdom	is	transformation.	It
does	not	come	from	any	scripture	or	from	any	source	whatsoever;	 it	 is	already
within	you	--	you	just	have	to	dig	deeply	into	your	own	being.	You	have	to	find
the	rock-bottom	beyond	which	you	cannot	go.
Once	 you	 have	 touched	 the	 rock-bottom,	 a	 fountain	 of	 wisdom	 immediately
starts	flowing	in	your	life.
And	 then	 that	 wisdom	 has	 freshness	 because	 it	 is	 not	 borrowed;	 it	 is	 young,
innocent,	uncorrupted.	It	is	not	cunning;	it	is	wise	but	not	clever,	it	is	intelligent
but	 not	 intellectual.	 And	 it	 will	 change	 every	 thing	 in	 your	 life.	 Knowledge
changes	nothing,	 it	simply	goes	on	accumulating	in	you;	you	remain	the	same.
Knowledge	becomes	like	a	burden;	you	can	carry	it	on	your	head,	you	can	go	on
piling	it	up	in	suitcases.	That's	what	memory	is,	just	the	piling	up	of	knowledge.
The	more	knowledge	you	have,	 the	more	you	will	be	 respected	by	people,	but
you	will	know	that	you	are	the	same	person.	You	will	not	respect	yourself,	you
will	 not	 have	 any	 self-respect.	 On	 the	 contrary	 you	 will	 have	 a	 deep	 self-
condemnation.	But	with	wisdom	it	is	possible,	people	may	not	respect	you,	they
may	even	condemn	you,	because	your	wisdom	will	be	so	fresh	and	so	new	that
they	may	not	be	able	to	absorb,	digest	it.	They	may	not	even	be	able	to	hear	it	--
it	may	be	so	shocking	to	them.	It	will	be	against	their	traditions	and	conventions.
Wisdom	is	never	conventional,	it	is	always	revolutionary.
Knowledge	 is	 always	 conventional.	 The	 pundit	 always	 follows	 the	 past;	 the
scholar	goes	on	digging	 in	 the	graves	 and	goes	on	 finding	 skulls	 and	bones	 --
that's	what	his	whole	work	is.	The	more	skulls	he	accumulates,	the	more	bones
he	accumulates,	the	greater	scholar	he	is	thought	to	be.
The	wise	man	has	no	accumulation	really,	but	he	has	a	tremendous	freshness,	the
freshness	of	 the	early	morning	breeze,	 the	freshness	of	 the	first	 ray	of	 the	sun,
the	 freshness	of	 the	 flowers	 just	opening,	 the	 freshness	of	dewdrops.	He	has	a
coolness,	a	calmness,	but	whatsoever	he	says	brings	rebellion	into	his	own	life
and	it	brings	rebellion	into	other	people's	lives.
That	 rebellious	 wisdom	 is	 possible	 only	 through	 meditation,	 not	 through
mentation.	Mentation	will	bring	you	more	and	more	knowledge,	and	meditation
will	 bring	 you	 more	 and	 more	 wisdom.	 When	 meditation	 is	 absolutely	 full,
complete,	entire;	when	nothing	 is	 left,	when	you	have	come	 to	a	point	beyond
which	there	is	no	further	to	go,	then	wisdom	is	total.
Then	 suddenly	your	 life	becomes	 integrated;	 it	 becomes	one,	 centered,	 rooted,
grounded.
Then	you	live	joyously	and	you	die	joyously.
Then	whatsoever	you	do	there	is	dance	in	it.
And	when	every	breath	is	a	celebration,	then	only	should	one	think	that	one	has
found	god,	truth,	the	home.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007035
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	GWIND03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
For	 centuries	 religions	 all	 over	 the	 world	 have	 been	 telling	 people	 to	 serve
humanity,	but	it	has	not	produced	any	effect,	it	has	not	served	any	purpose.	On
the	contrary,	it	has	created	hypocrites.	People	who	are	not	blissful	themselves	are
absolutely	unable	 to	help	 anybody.	Those	who	have	not	 attained	cannot	 share;
they	don't	have	it	to	share.	You	can	give	light	to	others	only	if	you	have	it	in	the
first	place.
Blind	people	trying	to	lead	other	blind	people	--	that's	what	has	been	happening.
It	is	a	very	dangerous	game,	because	if	the	blind	person	knows	nobody	is	leading
him,	he	tries	to	find	his	own	way,	he	tries	to	grope.	He	remains	careful,	cautious,
very	cautious.	But	 the	moment	he	finds	 that	somebody	is	 leading	him,	guiding
him,	that	he	has	found	a	leader	he	relaxes;	he	need	not	be	so	alert,	he	need	not	be
on	guard	so	much.
He	is	completely	unaware	that	the	guide	is	as	blind	as	he	himself.	Now	there	is
more	danger	than	there	was	before	because	he	will	not	 live	cautiously.	He	will
think	'Now	somebody	is	there	to	take	respon-sibility	--
why	be	worried?'
It	 is	because	of	 this	--	 these	blind	people	guiding	other	blind	people	--	 that	 the
whole	humanity	has	almost	become	a	madhouse:	 everybody	has	 fallen	 into	all
kinds	 of	 ditches,	 everybody	 is	 suffering.	 Life	 has	 become	 almost	 intolerable.
And	it	has	all	happened	through	good	intentions.
The	 people	 who	 have	 tried	 to	 help	 have	 only	 hindered	 growth.	 Christianity,
Hinduism,	Mohammedanism,	Buddhism,	Jainism;	all	teach	service	to	humanity:
service	to	humanity	is	the	way	to	god.
So	people	start	serving	without	knowing	whether	they	are	capable	of	serving	or
not.
You	won't	 allow	 anybody	 to	 operate	 on	 you	 unless	 he	 is	 a	 qualified	 surgeon.
Whatsoever	his	intentions,	even	if	they	are	very	good	intentions	--	he	reads	the
Bible	every	day	and	goes	to	church	and	he	talks	beautifully	about	god	and	about
prayer	and	he	is	a	man	of	prayer	--	still	we	will	say	'Don't	touch	my	body	--
you	are	not	a	surgeon.'	And	he	will	say,	'But	I	want	to	help	you,	I	want	to	serve
you.	Service	to	humanity	is	my	religion,	service	above	all.'	You	will	say,	'That's
very	good,	but	find	somebody	else!'
About	the	body	you	won't	allow	anybody	to	help	you	unless	he	is	qualified,	but
about	 the	soul	all	kinds	of	people	are	allowed	to	help	you.	Only	 the	awakened
ones	 can	 be	 helpers.	 Unless	 a	man	 is	 enlightened,	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 him	 to
guide	anybody.	Of	course	the	desire	to	guide	is	there	in	everybody,	it	is	very	ego-
fulfilling.	That's	why	everybody	is	ready	to	give	you	advice	whether	you	ask	for
it	or	not.	Unasked	for	advice	is	being	given,	and	good	advice,	because	everybody
wants	to	be,	at	least	in	SOMEBODY'S	eyes,	a	wise	man.	And	it	is	very	easy	to
advise	others.	They	may	not	have	practised	the	same	thing	in	their	own	life...
There	is	a	Sufi	story.	A	woman	came	to	a	Sufi	mystic	with	her	small	child	who
was	eating	 too	many	sweets,	 ice	cream	and	all	kinds	of	 things,	and	 the	mother
was	worried.	The	mother	believed	that	sugar	was	white	poison;	she	believed	in
naturopathy.	But	the	child	was	adamant	and	he	wouldn't	listen.
She	told	the	mystic	'I	have	tried	every	possible	way:	I	have	punished	him,	I	have
rewarded	him	--
nothing	works!	 He	 goes	 on	 eating	 sweets,	 he	 simply	 eats	 sweets	 and	 nothing
else.	He	is	ready	to	be	hungry	but	he	won't	eat	anything	else;	the	whole	day	he
goes	on	stuffing	himself.	We	are	worried	 --	 it	 is	going	 to	be	dangerous	 for	his
health,	for	his	teeth,	and	everything	will	be	affected.	You	have	to	do	something.
You	have	always	been	of	great	help	to	me	--	please	advise	this	stupid	child.	He	is
very	stubborn.'
The	mystic	 looked	at	 the	child	and	said	 to	 the	woman,	 'Come	back	after	 three
weeks.	 I	cannot	advise	you	 right	now.'	Even	 the	child	was	curious,	because	so
many	people	were	advising	him.	He	looked	at	the	mystic	and	said,	'What	is	the
matter?	 --	 because	 every	 person	 that	 I	 have	 come	 across	 advises	me,	 and	my
mother	takes	me	to	every	place.	I	have	become	accustomed	to	all	this	nonsense,
and	I	have	to	listen.	You	are	the	first	man	who	has	wanted	three	weeks.	Are	you
going	to	ponder	over	it?'
And	 the	old	man	 said,	 'No,	my	child,	 I	 am	not	going	 to	ponder	over	 it.	 I	 love
sweets	myself.	I	cannot	advise	you	right	now.	I	am	not	the	right	person	to	advise
you;	my	advice	will	be	futile.	Three	weeks	I	will	practise.	If	I	can	manage	at	this
age	to	drop	sweets	completely,	then	I	can	advise	you.	If	I	fail	I	will	confess
"I	cannot	advise	him	--	take	him	to	somebody	else."'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
After	three	weeks	they	came	back	and	the	old	man	said,	'Three	weeks	more	will
be	needed.'	The	child	said,	'What	is	the	matter?'	The	old	man	said,	'You	know,	I
know,	but	 this	woman	won't	understand	--	she	 is	mad!	I	have	been	 trying	hard
but	I	love	sweets.'
The	child	 said,	 'You	are	 right.	 I	 have	also	 tried	hard.	Not	 that	 I	 don't	want...	 I
understand	all	these	people	are	good	people	and	they	are	all	advising	me	for	my
good,	but	I	cannot	stop.'
The	 old	man	 said,	 'Wait	 three	weeks	more.'	And	 after	 three	weeks	when	 they
came	back	the	old	man	said	to	the	child,	'It	can	be	done,	my	boy.	I	have	done	it!
And	look:	I	am	a	very	old	man,	still	I	have	been	able	to	do	it.	Give	it	a	try.'	And
the	child	said,	'Okay,	master.	I	will	try!'
The	woman	was	puzzled.	She	said,	'This	is	the	first	time	that	the	child	has	taken
any	interest	in	any	adviser.	In	fact	he	insists	every	day,	"When	are	we	going	to
the	old	man?"	He	reminds	me,	"Now	three	weeks	are	over	and	we	should	go."
You	are	the	first	man	with	whom	he	has	agreed	willingly.'
The	old	man	said,	'The	reason	is	he	can	understand	that	I	have	tried	on	my	own
first,	I	have	practised	it.
He	can	see	my	sincerity;	it	is	not	mere	advice.	He	knows	it	has	cost	me	much.	I
love	sweets,	I	have	always	loved	sweets.	Sugar	may	be	white	poison	--	so	what?
One	 is	 going	 to	die	 sooner	or	 later.	And	 I	 am	an	old	man;	whether	 I	 live	 two
years	or	three	years	or	seven	years	or	ten,	what	does	it	matter?	--	one	day	one	has
to	die.	For	his	sake	I	practised	it,	and	I	give	my	word	that	I	will	never	eat	sweets,
I	will	never	again	use	sugar	in	my	life.	If	this	can	help	the	child,	then	it	is	okay,
otherwise	what	else	can	I	do?'	This	sincerity	worked;	 the	child	dropped	sweets
that	very	day.
Missionaries	have	been	doing	much	work	all	over	 the	world	--	missionaries	of
all	 religions	 --	 trying	 to	 help	 people	 with	 things	 they	 have	 not	 practised
themselves...
One	can	be	a	helper	only	if	one	has	first	helped	himself.	It	begins	from	your	very
innermost	core.	You	have	to	be	the	basic	experiment	of	transformation.
This	 is	my	 approach.	 So	 I	 don't	 say	 to	my	 sannyasins:	 go	 and	 help	 humanity.
Enough	 of	 that	 kind	 of	 help	 has	 been	 done	 and	 enough	 harm	 has	 been	 done
through	that	kind	of	help.	No	more	of	it!	I	insist:	help	yourself.	And	if	you	can
attain	to	light,	to	bliss,	to	an	experience	of	godliness,	then	you	are	bound	to	help
others.	There	is	no	need	to	say	anything	about	it;	it	will	overflow,	your	joy	will
start	 overflowing.	 And	 remember:	 only	 a	 blissful	 person	 can	 be	 helpful;	 the
miserable	person	can	only	harm.
So	the	first	thing	to	remember,	the	most	basic,	is	to	become	blissful.	Be	totally
selfish,	only	 then	can	you	be	 altruistic.	This	 is	 a	 strange	message,	because	 for
centuries	man	has	been	 told	 'Don't	be	 selfish,	 then	you	can	be	altruistic.'	 I	 say
just	 the	 opposite:	 Be	 totally	 selfish	 because	 only	 out	 of	 your	 selfishness	 does
altruism	grow;	it	is	not	against	it.
A	man	who	has	 loved	himself	will	be	able	 to	 love	others.	A	man	who	has	 felt
bliss	will	be	able	to	spread	it.	One	always	gives	whatsoever	one	has,	one	radiates
it.	It	is	not	possible	to	hide	it,	it	starts	functioning	of	its	own	accord...	It	is	such	a
miracle,	it	is	such	magic.
One	cannot	praise	god	unless	one's	life	is	a	celebration	--	obviously:	if	you	are
miserable	 you	 can	 only	 complain,	 you	 cannot	 praise	 --	 praise	 for	 what?	 You
cannot	feel	grateful	--	grateful	for	what?	In	fact	you	will	have	a	grudge	against
god.	Deep	down	you	will	feel	that	you	have	been	cheated.
One	 of	 the	 characters	 in	 Fyodor	 Dostoevsky's	 great	 novel	 BROTHERS
KARAMAZOV,	says	'If	I	meet	god	the	first	thing	I	am	going	to	ask	him	is	"Who
asked	 you	 to	 create	me?	And	 is	 it	 right	 to	 create	me	without	my	 permission?
This	 is	 an	 imposition,	 this	 is	 dictatorial.	 I	 never	 wanted	 your	 so-called	 life,
because	I	only	suffered.	Who	are	you	to	create	me	without	my	permission?	Do
you	enjoy	people	and	their	miseries?
Are	you	a	sadist	of	some	kind?	Are	we	created	just	to	keep	you	engaged,	and	are
all	kinds	of	miseries	created	for	us	 just	 for	your	enjoyment	and	entertainment?
What	is	this	existence	for,	for	what	purpose?"'
He	is	angry,	and	I	can	see	that	his	anger	has	a	certain	meaning.	In	fact	everybody
has	 felt	 that	 anger	 once	 in	 a	 while.	 Whenever	 you	 are	 in	 misery,	 in	 deep
suffering,	anguish,	you	have	felt	it.	It	is	not	just	fiction,	it	is	not	something	out	of
the	imagination	of	the	novelist;	it	is	very	true,	it	is	human.
It	will	 be	 impossible	 to	 forgive	 god	 if	we	 remain	miserable	 --	what	 to	 say	 of
praising?	That's	why	 people	who	 pray	 are	 bound	 to	 remain	 hypocrites	 for	 the
simple	 reason:	 they	 have	 not	 tasted	 of	 bliss	 --	 how	 can	 they	 show	 their
thankfulness?	Maybe	they	are	praying	out	of	fear,	but	how	can	prayer	arise	out
of	fear?	Out	of	fear	love	never	arises;	out	of	fear	arises	hatred,	anger.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 seems	 to	 be	 far	 more	 authentic	 man	 than	 your	 so-called
popes	 and	 ayatollahs	 and	 imams	 and	pundits	 and	 shankaracharyas,	 because	he
declared	 that	 god	 is	 dead!	That	was	 just	 sheer	 anger,	 anger	 at	 being	 in	 such	 a
miserable	situation	where	there	seems	to	be	no	way	to	get	out.	The	more	you	try
to	 get	 out,	 the	 more	 you	 become	 entangled.	 The	 more	 you	 try	 to	 solve	 the
problems	of	life,	the	more	you	come	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	see	that	they	are	insoluble.
Still	man	has	to	live	because	there	is	a	deep	desire	 to	 live.	God	has	given	us	a
tremendous	 libido,	 a	 lust	 for	 life	 --	 and	 life	 is	 full	of	misery.	He	has	created	a
dilemma,	a	double-bind;	he	won't	allow	you	to	die	easily	and	he	won't	allow	you
to	live	easily	either.
It	 is	 very	 natural	 that	 the	 twentieth	 century	 has	 revolted	 against	 religions.	All
intelligent	 people	 all	 over	 the	world	 are	 against	 religion	 for	 the	 simple	 reason
that	 the	 whole	 thing	 seems	 to	 be	 insincere.	 You	 cannot	 pray,	 you	 cannot	 feel
thankful	because	there	is	nothing	to	feel	thankful	for.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 a	 totally	 new	 concept	 of	 religion	 which	 will	 be
applicable	 to	 the	modern	mind,	which	will	 be	 contemporary.	All	 religions	 are
rotten	and	old	now.	They	have	lost	their	relevance,	their	context,	they	have	lost
all	their	meaning.	They	may	have	been	meaningful	once,	but	now	man	has	come
of	age.
Five	thousand	years	ago	men	were	like	small	children.	They	needed	a	different
kind	of	religion,	a	very	childish	religion:	god	the	father,	and	angels	flying	with
wings	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 fairy	 tales.	 They	were	 good	 for	 children	 to	 keep	 them
engaged,	 colourful,	 but	 not	 for	 people	 who	 have	 become	 grown-up.	 And	 our
religions	 are	 still	 hanging	 around	 those	 ancient	 fairy	 tales.	 They	 still	 talk	 a
language	which	is	okay	as	far	as	children	are	concerned	but	which	is	stupid,	silly
as	far	as	silly	as	far	as	a	grown-up	person	is	concerned.
It	 is	good	to	 take	small	children	to	Disneyland,	but	when	the	Dalai	Lama	goes
and	visits	 it,	 then	 it	 looks	silly,	 just	 stupid.	But	 I	can	see	 the	 reason:	 the	Dalai
Lama	also	lives	in	a	very	childish	religious	attitude.	He	was	deeply	interested,	he
enjoyed	it	very	much.	There	seems	to	be	a	certain	affinity	between	the	childish
mind	and	the	old	religious	mind.
To	me	religion	should	start	not	with	a	belief	in	god;	a	grown-up's	religion	cannot
start	by	any	belief	--	it	can	only	start	in	scientific	experimen-tation.	One	has	to
become	 the	 scientific	 lab	 oneself.	 Of	 course	 the	 experimentation	 is	 inner	 and
subjective,	but	it	is	as	scientific	as	any	objective	experiment.	In	fact	one	has	to
be	more	alert	because	one	will	be	dealing	with	more	subtle	phenomena.	And	one
has	 to	 look	for	god,	one	has	 to	 look	for	bliss,	because	bliss	 is	a	natural	desire;
god	almost	seems	to	be	something	imposed	upon	us.
Religions	can	be	without	god;	there	are	religions	--	Buddhism,	Jainism.	They	are
without	god.	God	doesn't	seem	to	be	a	necessary	hypothesis	at	all.	But	without
bliss	 there	 can	 be	 no	 religion	 because	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 any	 religion.
Religion	means	the	science	of	bliss.	How	to	transform	our	energies	from	a	state
of	misery	into	a	state	of	bliss	--	that	should	be	the	whole	of	religion.
And	this	is	my	experience,	that	when	it	happens	a	great	gratitude	arises.	In	that
gratitude,	for	 the	first	 time	you	feel	 the	presence	of	something	divine.	You	can
call	it	god,	you	can	call	it	truth,	you	can	call	it	tao
--	it	doesn't	matter	what	you	call	it	--	or	you	may	not	call	it	anything;	you	may
remain	 completely	 silent	 about	 it	 because	 it	 is	 something	 inexpressible.	 But
certainly	 it	 happens	 when	 you	 are	 blissful.	 Then	 you	 start	 feeling	 a	 deep
thankfulness	towards	existence.	That	is	praise	of	the	lord.
Find	 bliss	 and	 you	 will	 have	 found	 prayer	 as	 a	 consequence	 of	 it.	 But	 for
centuries	you	have	been	told:	pray	and	then	you	will	find	bliss.	I	am	saying	just
the	opposite:	become	blissful	and	prayer	will	come	of	its	own	accord.	And	then
prayer	 has	 a	 beauty	 of	 its	 own:	 it	 is	without	 fear,	without	 greed.	You	 are	 not
asking	for	anything;	it	is	not	beggarly.	You	are	simply	feeling	a	thankfulness	to
the	 unknown	 source	 of	 all,	 to	 the	 ultimate	 source	 of	 all.	 And	 now	 you	 have
something	to	feel	grateful	for	--	you	cannot	complain.
Dostoevsky	lived	in	misery.	For	his	whole	life	he	was	a	miserable	man.	He	lived
in	 all	 kinds	 of	 nightmares,	 he	 was	 really	 a	 tortured	 soul.	 He	 represented	 the
modern	consciousness	in	all	its	naked	anguish,	in	its	ugliest	form.	He	suffered	--
it	is	natural	that	he	was	angry.	The	same	was	true	about	Friedrich	Nietzsche;	he
was	 also	 suffering	 very	 much.	 They	 were	 unable	 to	 find	 any	 way	 because
Christianity	 had	 become	 almost	 hocus-pocus.	 After	 Jesus	 died	 Christianity
became	a	dead	phenomenon.
Nietzsche	was	 right	when	he	 said	 that	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last	Christian	died	 two
thousand	years	ago	on	the	cross	--	the	first	and	the	last,	he	said.	After	Jesus	there
has	 only	 been	 a	 long	 queue	 of	 stupid	 of	 people,	 of	 all	 kinds	 of	 superstitious
people.	 But	 this	 has	 happened	 to	 almost	 every	 religion	 more	 or	 less;	 the
difference	is	only	of	quantity.
I	don't	want	to	give	any	belief,	any	dogma,	any	creed.	I	trust	only	in	experience.
So	while	being	here	with	me	and	becoming	a	sannyasin,	this	has	to	be	your	goal:
to	 become	more	 blissful.	We	 create	 our	misery,	 hence	 it	 is	 not	 difficult	 to	 be
blissful.	 It	 is	 just	 because	 we	 don't	 understand	 how	 we	 go	 on	 creating	 our
misery;	once	we	understand	 the	mechanism	of	how	we	go	on	doing	 it,	we	can
stop	 doing	 it.	 And	 the	 same	 energy	 starts	 moving	 into	 different	 directions.	 It
starts	 becoming	 a	 totally	 new	 phenomenon:	 it	 becomes	 bliss,	 and	 then	 prayer
follows.
That	 prayer	 is	 neither	 Christian	 nor	 Hindu	 nor	Mohammedan.	 That	 prayer	 is
simply	prayerfulness.	That	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
prayer	is	not	addressed	to	any	particular	god	--	Christian,	Jewish,	Mohammedan
--	it	is	not	really	addressed	to	anybody	in	particular.	It	is	simply	a	heartfelt	joy,	a
thankfulness	for	the	whole	existence:	for	the	trees,	for	the	clouds,	for	the	stars,
for	all	that	has	been,	is,	and	will	be.
--	What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name,	Kiffy?	--	I	don't	know.	--	And	I	also	don't
know,	so...!	You	have	such	a	beautiful	name	--	 there	is	no	need	for	a	meaning.
Ma	Anand	Kiffy	--	we	will	call	you	blissful	Kiffy.	Whatsoever	Kiffy	means,	be
blissful!	That	 is	 the	real	 thing;	 that	 is	 the	elephant.	Kiffy	 is	 just	 the	 tail-end.	 If
the	elephant	passes	by,	the	tall	will	also	go!	How	long	will	you	be	here?	--	Till
December,	I	think.	--	That's	good.	Both	the	elephant	and	the	tail	will	go!
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007045
ShortTitle:	GWIND04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Marianne	is	a	very	beautiful	name,	of	great	meaning.	It	also	has	a	paradox	in	it.
That	 paradox	makes	 it	 even	more	 beautiful,	more	 truthful.	 So	 it	 is	 not	 only	 a
name	 but	 becomes	 representative	 of	 something	 significant	 in	 life.	 It	 has	 two
meanings.	The	first	meaning	is	bitter	grace.
The	 first	 time	 that	 one	 hears	 that	 it	 means	 bitter	 grace	 it	 appears	 a	 little	 bit
strange,	because	we	have	always	thought	that	grace	is	sweet	--	why	should	grace
be	bitter?	But	in	fact	in	the	beginning	it	is	bitter,	because	grace	is	possible	only
when	 one	 allows	 one's	 ego	 to	 die.	 That	 is	 its	 bitterness,	 its	 pain.	 It	 is	 very
difficult	to	allow	oneself	to	disappear;	to	drop	the	ego	is	the	most	difficult	thing
in	life.	People	go	on	clinging	to	it	in	one	way	or	another,	because	they	think	if
the	ego	 is	 totally	gone	 then	we	are	 lost,	completely	 lost.	But	 that's	an	 illusion.
When	 the	 ego	 is	 gone	 you	 are	 found	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 not	 lost;	 hence	 the
beginning	is	bitter,	but	the	end	is	tremendously	sweet.
And	 from	 that	 end	 part	 comes	 the	 second	meaning...	 The	 second	meaning	 of
marianne	 is	 living	 fragrance;	 when	 one	 has	 allowed	 the	 ego	 to	 die	 then	 life
becomes	a	fragrance;	then	all	misery	disappears.
Misery	stinks,	it	is	dirty;	it	is	a	wound	full	of	pus.	Once	the	ego	is	gone	one	is
healed	and	whole.	Then	life	opens	up	like	a	lotus	flower.	There	is	great	rejoicing
--	one	is	fulfilled,	contented.	For	the	first	time	one	feels	one	has	come	home.
The	beginning	is	bitter	but	the	end	is	very	sweet.
Gautam	the	Buddha	used	to	say	again	and	again	that	worldly	pleasures	are	sweet
in	the	beginning	and	bitter	in	the	end.	And	divine	bliss	is	bitter	in	the	beginning
and	sweet	in	the	end.
Bliss	 alone,	 without	 peace,	 is	 a	 state	 of	 feverishness,	 excitement,	 but	 not	 of
ecstasy.	 That's	 the	 difference	 between	 excitement	 and	 ecstasy:	 ecstasy	 is	 both
blissful	and	peaceful;	excitement	is	only	bliss;	hence	there	is	such	turmoil.	It	is	a
beautiful	turmoil,	it	is	a	noise,	a	noise	that	one	would	like	to	have,	but	sooner	or
later	one	is	bound	to	get	tired	of	it.	That's	what	happens	to	all	kinds	of	pleasures
and	happiness	and	joys	in	life.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
They	 are	 all	 different	 facades	 of	 bliss,	 but	 one	 thing	 is	 missing	 --	 peace	 is
missing	 --	 hence	 they	 are	 shallow,	 and	 ultimately	 boring	 and	 tiring.	 They	 are
good	for	a	few	moments	but	how	long	can	one	remain	excited?
Excitement	is	exertion,	it	is	not	rest;	hence	bliss	alone	is	not	of	much	value.
Peace	alone	is	also	not	of	much	value.	It	is	cold	and	dead.	It	is	like	the	silence
that	prevails	in	the	cemetery;	it	is	the	silence	of	the	grave.	You	will	find	it	around
the	so-called	saints.	They	are	peaceful	because	they	are	dead.
The	real	thing	is	to	have	both	together,	 then	peace	remains	the	centre	and	bliss
becomes	the	cyclone.
And	 when	 you	 have	 both,	 life	 is	 ecstatic,	 it	 is	 tremendous	 joy.	 And	 it	 is	 not
tiring;	 on	 the	 contrary,	 it	 goes	 on	 refreshing	 you.	 Then	 it	 is	 bliss	 with	 a	 new
dimension,	the	dimension	of	peacefulness.	It	is	peace	with	a	new	dimension,	the
dimension	of	blissfulness.
Both	together	make	life	whole.	Otherwise,	it	is	easy	to	achieve	one,	but	then	one
remains	lop-sided	and	one	remains	half;	and	to	be	half	is	to	be	miserable.	To	be
whole	brings	celebration	to	life.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	really	whole	persons.
A	person	becomes	capable	of	blessing	others	only	when	he	is	full	of	blissfulness.
In	 fact	 then	 one	 need	 not	 bless,	 blessings	 go	 on	 pouring.	 Your	 bliss	 starts
overflowing;	you	become	like	a	fountain.	And	you	become	connected	with	 the
inexhaustible	source	of	life.	That	source	is	called	god.
God	is	not	a	person,	remember.	God	simply	means	the	ultimate	source	of	all.	We
come	from	it,	the	trees	grow	from	it,	and	the	stars	and	the	whole	world...	God	is
like	the	ocean	and	we	are	all	waves	in	the	ocean.
Not	remaining	rooted	in	the	whole	is	the	cause	of	man's	misery;	being	rooted	in
the	whole	life	immediately	becomes	blissful.
We	are	not	separate	entities,	but	we	go	on	believing	that	we	are	separate	entities.
That	is	just	an	illusion,	but	it	has	been	perpetuated	by	the	society,	by	education,
by	every	method	and	means.	There	are	vested	interests	behind	it:	they	want	you
to	remain	miserable,	the	state	wants	you	to	remain	miserable,	the	church	wants
you	to	remain	miserable,	the	priests	and	the	politicians	are	in	conspiracy	to	keep
everybody	miserable	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 only	miserable	 people	 can	 be
controlled,	they	can	be	enslaved.	They	are	so	tired	and	exhausted,	they	are	not	in
a	state	to	fight	or	rebel.	They	are	in	such	misery	that	they	lose	all	intelligence.
Intelligence	needs	 the	 soil	of	blissfulness.	 It	 is	 a	 rose	 that	grows	 in	 the	 soil	of
blissfulness.	 And	 the	 politicians	 and	 the	 priests	 are	 very	 much	 afraid	 of
intelligence	because	intelligence	is	rebellious.	Intelligence	cannot	say	yes	to	all
kinds	of	imprisonments.	An	intelligent	person	would	rather	die	than	sell	his	soul.
He	will	not	allow	himself	to	be	reduced	to	a	commodity....	And	that's	what	the
priests	and	 the	politicians	want:	everybody	should	be	reduced	 to	a	commodity,
everybody	should	be	reduced	to	a	thing,	to	a	machine.	Of	course	they	want	the
machines	 to	 be	 efficient;	 for	 that	 purpose	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities	 exist.
They	 are	 not	 to	 make	 you	 intelligent,	 mind	 you;	 they	 exist	 to	 destroy	 your
intelligence,	they	exist	to	create	mediocrity	in	you.	Their	purpose	is	to	make	you
efficient	machines	so	 that	you	can	be	used	by	 the	powers.	The	powers	may	be
political,	religious,	social...	whosoever	is	in	power.	Educational	systems	all	over
the	 world	 serve	 the	 powerful	 people	 and	 their	 interests.	 They	 are	 not	 in	 the
service	of	people.
The	 function	 of	 a	master	 is	 to	 undo	whatsoever	 the	 society	 has	 done.	 It	 is	 to
negate	 all	 that	 has	 been	 imposed	 upon	 you.	 And	 once	 all	 the	 thick	 layers	 of
conditioning	are	removed,	your	ego	starts	disappearing.
It	is	the	ego	that	keeps	you	separate	from	the	whole	and	keeps	you	miserable.
The	moment	bliss	arises	in	your	heart	--	and	it	always	means	only	one	thing,	that
you	are	again	bridged	with	 the	whole	 --	 then	 immediately	your	 life	becomes	a
light,	not	only	for	yourself	but	for	others	too.	Your	life	becomes	love.	Not	that
you	are	loving,	you	become	simply	love.	That's	how	one	becomes	a	blessing	to
the	whole	existence.
Blessed	 are	 those	 who	 are	 blissful	 because	 they	 are	 not	 only	 a	 blessing	 to
themselves	but	a	blessing	to	all.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#5
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
5	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007055
ShortTitle:	GWIND05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	can	live	either	by	his	own	will	or	as	part	of	god's	will.	The	first	is	the	way
of	the	ignorant	person,	and	because	of	that	the	ignorant	person	suffers.	His	whole
effort	is	futile	because	he	is	trying	to	do	something	which	is	impossible.	We	are
part	 of	 the	 whole,	 we	 cannot	 exist	 as	 separate	 entities,	 not	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment.
We	 can	 believe	 that	 we	 exist	 as	 separate	 entities,	 but	 that	 is	 only	 belief,	 not
reality.	And	whenever	belief	goes	against	reality	it	creates	suffering	because	you
live	according	to	something	which	is	not	the	cass;	you	start	going	wrong.	When
you	live	according	to	the	real	there	is	no	misery	--	bliss	is	the	outcome.
The	man	who	understands	drops	his	ego	for	 the	simple	reason	 that	 it	 is	only	a
false	notion.	There	is	no	way	to	materialise	it;	it	will	remain	false.	And	to	spin
and	weave	your	 life	around	something	false	 is	a	sheer	wastage	of	energy...	but
that's	what	millions	of	people	go	on	doing,	hence	 they	 suffer.	The	 suffering	 is
caused	 because	 without	 understanding	 the	 reality	 they	 go	 on	 trying	 to	 do
something	 against	 it.	 They	 are	 trying	 to	 go	 against	 the	 current.	 Their	 whole
energy	becomes	a	constant	fight	--	and	they	are	bound	to	lose,	because	how	can
the	part	win	against	the	whole?	It	is	like	a	leaf	fighting	with	the	tree	itself.
If	 the	 leaf	 has	 consciousness	 it	 may	 start	 thinking	 it	 is	 separate,	 that	 it	 has
nothing	to	do	with	the	tree,	that	it	will	have	its	own	way.	And	then	immediately
there	 will	 be	 trouble,	 there	 will	 be	 conflict.	 It	 will	 become	 more	 and	 more
alienated	from	its	own	sources	of	energy.	The	tree	is	its	mother,	and	the	tree	is
not	only	a	tree,	it	is	rooted	in	the	earth;	it	represents	the	whole	earth.	It	breathes
the	air,	it	represents	the	whole	atmosphere.	It	is	connected	with	the	sun	and	with
the	farthest	star.	To	fight	with	the	tree	is	to	fight	with	the	universe.	Just	a	poor,
tiny	leaf	 trying	to	fight	with	the	universe	--	 the	whole	idea	is	stupid.	But	 that's
what	man	goes	on	doing:	he	goes	on	pushing	the	river.
Sannyas	means	dropping	the	fight	with	the	river,	going	with	the	river,	allowing
the	river	 to	take	you,	 learning	the	art	of	 let-go.	Those	two	small,	simple	words
'let',	 'go',	define	 the	very	spirit	of	sannyas.	Then	one	can	say	 'Let	 thy	kingdom
come,	 thy	will	 be	 done.'	 Then	 one	withdraws	 one's	will,	 and	 the	moment	 you
withdraw	 your	will	 your	 life	 becomes	 immensely	 rich.	 Suddenly	 the	whole	 is
with	you,	and	we	can	be	victorious	only	when	the	whole	is	with	us.
Yogi	means	one	who	is	practising	the	art,	the	science	of	becoming	one	with	the
universe.	Except	for	the	ego	there	is	no	other	problem	in	life;	all	other	problems
are	 offshoots.	 But	 people	 go	 on	 trying	 to	 solve	 other	 problems	 which	 are
offshoots.	You	can	go	on	pruning	the	leaves	and	the	branches,	but	unless	you	cut
the	 root	new	 leaves	will	 come,	new	branches	will	 come.	 In	 fact	 the	more	you
prune	the	leaves	and	the	branches,	the	thicker	will	become	the	foliage	of	the	tree.
That's	 what	 happens:	 the	more	 you	 try	 to	 solve	 your	 problems,	 the	more	 you
become	entangled	in	them.	You	solve	one	problem	and	your	solution	brings	ten
more	 problems	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 it,	 and	 life	 goes	 on	 becoming	more	 and	more
complex.
The	 child	 comes	 into	 the	 world	 without	 any	 problems,	 and	 every	 old	 man,
almost	every	one,	except	for	the	few	Buddhas,	die	burdened	with	problems.	And
they	have	carried	these	mountains	of	problems	all	their	life	for	the	simple	reason
that	they	have	been	trying	to	solve	the	symptoms	and	not	going	to	the	cause	of	it.
And	it	is	easy	to	solve	one	symptom,	but	then	the	problem	will	assert	itself	from
somewhere	else.
You	cannot	get	rid	of	symptoms	directly;	you	will	have	to	go	to	the	root.	And	the
stupidity	 of	 man	 is	 such	 that	 he	 goes	 on	 watering	 the	 root	 and	 cutting	 the
branches.	Both	 things	 he	 goes	 on	doing	 simultaneously	 because	 he	 cannot	 see
the	 relationship.	 There	 is	 a	 certain	 reason	why	 he	 cannot	 see	 the	 relationship
between	 the	 branches,	 the	 leaves,	 the	 foliage,	 and	 the	 roots:	 the	 roots	 are
invisible.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
You	need	a	very	penetrating	consciousness	to	reach	the	roots,	because	they	are
underground	and	everything	else	 is	above	the	ground	--	you	can	see	 it.	So	you
see	anger,	you	see	jealousy,	you	see	possessiveness,	you	see	greed,	ambition,	and
a	thousand	and	one	problems	--	and	naturally	because	you	see	them	and	you	see
that	they	all	bring	misery...	Who	does	not	know	that	anger	brings	misery?	Who
has	not	suffered	from	answer?	Who	has	not	burned	his	hands	in	anger?	And	who
has	not	tried	to	get	rid	of	it?
The	same	is	the	case	with	other	problems...	Nobody	wants	to	remain	greedy	--	it
is	ugly	and	nothing	ever	satisfies	it.	You	can	have	as	much	money	as	you	want
and	you	will	still	want	more	because	greed	means	the	desire	for	more.	It	has	no
limitation,	 it	 is	 unlimited;	 it	 does	 not	 believe	 in	 limits.	 So	 when	 one	 limit	 is
crossed...	that	was	only	temporary.	Greed	immediately	jumps	ahead	of	you,	it	is
always	 ahead	 of	 you,	 it	 is	 always	 pointing	 far	 away,	 here,	 to	 the	 horizon.	 It
always	keeps	the	goal	the	same	distance	from	you;	whatsoever	you	have	makes
no	difference.	If	you	have	ten	rupees	it	asks	for	a	hundred,	if	you	have	a	hundred
rupees	 it	 asks	 for	 one	 thousand,	 if	 you	 have	 one-thousand	 it	 asks	 for	 ten
thousand.	The	distance	remains	the	same.
It	is	exactly	like	the	horizon:	between	you	and	the	horizon	the	distance	is	always
the	 same	wherever	 you	 are,	 because	 the	 horizon	 does	 not	 really	 exist,	 it	 is	 an
illusion.	Greed	creates	an	illusion	of	a	goal,	but	it	doesn't	exist,	otherwise	people
would	have	achieved	it,	at	least	a	few	people	would	have	achieved	it.	But	in	the
whole	of	history	not	 a	 single	person	has	been	able	 to	 fulfil	his	greed.	Without
any	 exception	 all	 have	 failed.	 But	 still	 we	 go	 on	 trying.	 So	 sooner	 or	 later
everybody	comes	to	feel	that	it	is	a	stupid	effort	it	is	doomed	to	fail,	an	exercise
in	 utter	 futility.	And	 one	 can	 see	 the	 ugliness	 of	 it	 because	 the	 greedy	 person
becomes	 like	 an	 octopus	 His	 whole	 being	 is	 just	 tentacles	 spreading	 in	 all
directions,	grabbing	everything.
The	 English	 word	 'greed'	 comes	 from	 a	 Sanskrit	 root	 and	 the	 Sanskrit	 word
'vulture'	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root.	 The	 greedy	 person	 is	 like	 a	 vulture	 --
murderous,	ready	to	eat	even	a	dead	corpse.	One	feels	the	ugliness	of	is	and	one
wants	to	get	rid	of	it,	but	you	cannot	get	rid	of	it	because	you	go	on	watering	the
root:	the	root	is	ego.	It	is	ego	that	wants	to	fulfil	impossible	goals.	In	fact	the	ego
is	not	interested	in	possible	goals	at	all,	they	look	too	ordinary;	anybody	can	do
them.	The	ego	always	wants	to	do	something	extraordinary	to	prove	'I	am	not	so
ordinary	 person.'	 That	 is	 the	 deepest	 desire	 of	 the	 ego:	 to	 prove	 oneself
extraordinary.	 But	 the	 desire	 to	 be	 extraordinary	 is	 very	 ordinary,	 it	 is	 in
everybody's	heart;	it	is	nothing	special.
In	fact	to	accept	one's	ordinariness	is	really	extraordinary	because	it	is	very	rare.
It	happens	only	once	in	a	while	that	a	person	accepts	his	ordinariness	with	joy	--
not	 out	 of	 despair	 or	 failure,	 not	 to	 console	 oneself,	 but	 blissfully,	 through
understanding.
The	ego	wants	to	prove,	and	greed	comes	in,	ambition	comes	in.	And	whenever
your	 greed,	 your	 ambition,	 is	 hindered	 by	 anything...	 And	 it	 is	 bound	 to	 be
hindered	because	 the	 same	 type	of	 people	 are	 all	 around.	They	 are	 all	 greedy,
they	all	want	the	same	thing,	that	you	want;	hence	there	is	going	to	be	conflict,
there	is	going	to	be	cut-throat	competition,	hence	the	answer.
And	whatsoever	you	catch	hold	of,	you	cling	to,	afraid	that	somebody	else	may
snatch	 it	 away	because	 there	 are	 so	many	vultures	 around;	 the	whole	world	 is
full	of	vultures.	Clinging	arises,	attachment	arises,	possessiveness	arises,	and	the
fear,	 the	constant	 fear,	because	you	have	snatched	 it	 from	somebody	else,	now
many	people	are	after	you.
All	 these	problems	arise	one	by	one	out	of	a	 single	 root:	 the	ego.	The	man	of
penetrating	awareness	cuts	the	invisible	root;	that's	what	sannyas	is:	surrendering
the	 ego.	 And	 the	 moment	 you	 surrender	 the	 ego,	 immediately	 the	 meeting
happens;	immediately	you	are	one	with	the	whole.	And	to	be	one	with	the	whole
is	bliss,	is	benediction,	is	ecstasy,	is	freedom,	freedom	from	all	diseases,	freedom
from	all	restlessness,	freedom	from	all	ugliness.
Love	 is	 the	very	essence	of	prayer.	Those	who	pray	without	 love,	 their	prayer
remains	formal.	It	is	an	empty	gesture	with	no	reality,	no	significance.	They	can
go	on	praying	for	lives	together	--	no	transformation	is	going	to	happen	through
their	prayer.	They	are	deceiving	themselves	and	nobody	else.
Real	 prayer	 arises	 only	 out	 of	 love.	 And	 the	 irony	 is	 that	 all	 the	 so-called
religions	have	been	against	love	and	for	prayer.	They	destroy	the	very	possibility
of	prayer	and	then	they	impose	a	false,	a	pseudo	kind	of	prayer.
There	is	a	reason	why	they	do	it;	because	if	a	man	really	comes	to	know	prayer
through	 love,	 he	 will	 not	 be	 Christian	 or	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan	 --	 he	 will
simply	be	religious.	But	Christians,	Mohammedans,	Hindus	are	not	interested	in
somebody's	 being	 religious.	 Their	 interest	 is	 that	 the	 person	 should	 belong	 to
their	fold,	to	their	flock,	to	their	crowd.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	only	way	to	prevent	people	from	moving	in	the	right	direction	is	to	cut	the
very	source	of	real	prayer	--	that	is	love.	So	they	all	condemn	love	and	they	all
praise	prayer.	 It	 is	 like	condemning	rose	bushes	and	praising	 roses:	 the	natural
outcome	will	be	that	people	will	have	to	purchase	plastic	roses.	And	that's	what
established	religions	have	been	doing:	selling	plastic	roses.
Plastic	roses	can	be	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan;	they	can	be	manufactured
in	different	shapes,	colours;	they	can	even	be	perfumed.	They	are	cheap	and	they
are	lasting.	And	the	churches	are	not	interested	in	your	transformation,	they	have
their	vested	interest.
All	 the	 churches	 in	 the	 world	 are	 interested	 in	 keeping	 their	 power	 intact;
nobody	wants	to	love	power	hence	whenever	there	is	a	person	who	starts	talking
about	 real	 roses,	 all	 the	 shopkeepers	who	 have	 been	 selling	 false	 roses,	 paper
roses,	plastic	roses,	are	angry.	They	crucified	Jesus	for	the	simple	reason	that	he
said	'Love	is	god.'	Immediately	the	Jewish	priesthood	became	aware:	this	man	is
dangerous	--	he	is	talking	about	real	roses.	Then	what	will	happen	to	our	shops?
And	 about	 real	 roses	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be	 understood	 they	 have	 to	 be	 grown
within	 one's	 own	 self.	 You	 don't	 need	 anybody	 else's	 garden	 for	 it.	 You	 don't
need	any	church,	any	temple,	you	don't	need	the	Bible,	the	Koran,	the	Gita.	You
don't	need	any	priesthood,	any	mediators	between	you	and	god.	You	have	to	seek
and	 search	 for	 your	 own	 innermost	 core	 --	 and	 there	 is	 the	 garden,	 there	 is
paradise.
The	English	word	 'paradise'	 comes	 from	a	Persian	word	 'firdaus'	Firdaus	has	a
beautiful	meaning;	it	means	a	garden.	In	English	it	has	lost	its	original	meaning;
it	simply	means	a	walled	garden.	Of	course	in	a	desert	heaven	can	be	conceived,
only	 as	 a	 walled	 garden,	 as	 an	 oasis.	 And	 life	 is	 almost	 like	 a	 desert,	 but
everybody	is	carrying	the	seed,	the	soil,	the	climate,	the	possibility,	the	potential
--	everything	that	is	possibly	needed	to	grow	roses	within	their	being.	Once	all
the	churches	have	to	stop	you	from	becoming	interested	in	 love,	only	then	can
their	shops	go	on	doing	business.
They	were	bound	to	crucify	Jesus.	They	crucified	Jesus	and	then	they	made	the
CHristian	church	along	the	same	lines	as	those	against	which	Jesus	was	fighting.
The	Christian	church	is	as	against	Jesus	as	was	the	Jewish	priesthood;	there	is	no
difference.
Buddhists	are	as	against	Buddha	as	were	the	Hindus.	When	a	master	is	dead	you
can	start	the	business	again	in	his	name.
The	garden	is	within	you,	and	the	way	to	find	it	is	to	first	become	very	clear	that
prayer	is	a	by-product	of	love;	hence	nobody	can	learn	prayer	from	the	outside.
One	can	forget	about	prayer;	one	should	simply	move	naturally	into	love.	Love
as	many	people	as	possible,	 in	as	many	ways	as	possible.	Love	animals,	birds,
trees,	 rocks.	 Let	 love	 be	 your	 religion,	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 you	 will	 see	 new
nuances	 arising	 in	your	 love,	new	 fragrances,	 new	experiences,	 new	 territories
opening.	New	wonders	and	new	mysteries	are	being	revealed	to	the	lover	every
day.
And	the	ultimate	phenomenon	is	prayer;	one	becomes	so	full	of	love	that	each	of
one's	 acts	 becomes	 an	 act	 of	 love.	 does	 one	 feel	 the	 presence	 of	 god-	 in	 the
rocks,	in	the	trees,	in	the	birds,	in	the	people,	everywhere.
My	sannyas	is	a	religionless	religion.	It	is	not	Christian,	it	is	not	Hindu,	it	is	not
Mohammedan.	 It	 certainly	 has	 something	 to	 do	 with	 Christ	 and	 Buddha	 and
Krishna	 and	 Mohammed,	 but	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 any	 established	 church,
established	 religion.	 And	 as	 your	 love	 grows	 you	 will	 find	 that	 your	 love
becomes	so	absorbing	that	it	can	absorb	Krishna	and	Buddha,	Jesus,	Zarathustra,
Lao	 Tzu.	 And	 your	 love	 is	 so	 vast,	 it	 can	 contain	 all	 these	 people	 with	 no
contradiction,	with	no	problem	at	all.
Jesus	 says	 'The	 house	 of	 my	 god	 is	 huge,	 it	 has	 many	 rooms.'	 In	 his	 house
Krishna	can	be	a	guest.
Buddha	can	be	a	guest,	Lao	Tzu	can	be	a	guest	--	they	are	welcome.	In	my	house
too,	 all	 are	 welcome	 --	 but	 not	 the	 priests,	 not	 the	 popes,	 not	 the
shankaracharyas,	not	the	immams.	These	are	the	most	irreligious	people	on	the
earth,	 the	 enemies	of	 religion.	They	have	poisoned	everybody's	heart	 and	 they
have	 exploited	 peoples'	 faith,	 trust,	 prayer	 everything.	 They	 have	 profaned
something	sacred	in	the	heart	of	man.	They	are	criminals,	they	are	sinners.
The	Golden	Wind
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007065
ShortTitle:	GWIND06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Meditation	is	a	process	of	alchemy.	It	is	a	very	wrong	notion,	but	very	prevalent
all	 over	 the	 world,	 that	 alchemy	 was	 just	 primitive	 chemistry.	 Alchemy	 had
nothing	to	do	with	chemistry	at	all.	Chemistry	is	part	of	science,	alchemy	is	part
of	 religion.	Chemistry	 belongs	 to	 the	world	 of	matter,	 alchemy	belongs	 to	 the
world	of	consciousness.
But	 this	wrong	notion	has	 arisen	because	of	 a	 certain	 historical	 necessity.	The
Christian	 church	was	 so	 repressive	 that	 all	mystic	 schools	 in	 the	West	 had	 to
function	under	disguise;	they	had	to	go	underground.
And	 the	 only	 way	 to	 go	 underground	 was	 to	 pretend	 that	 they	 were	 doing
something	 else.	 So	 on	 the	 periphery	 they	 pretended	 that	 they	 were	 trying	 to
change	baser	metals	 into	gold.	That	was	only	a	deception;	 it	was	 to	befool	 the
church	and	 the	state	and	 the	crowd.	Behind	 the	 facade	was	 the	 real	work.	The
real	 work	 was	 to	 transform	 the	 lower	 energies,	 metaphorically	 called	 baser
metals,	 into	 higher	 energies,	 metaphorically,	 gold.	 It	 was	 a	 process,	 of
tremendous	importance,	to	transform	sexual	energy	into	superconsciousness.
In	the	East	it	never	happened,	because	in	the	East	religions	have	never	been	so
repressive.	 In	 fact	 in	 the	 East	 religions	 have	 never	 been	 so	 organised.	 For
example,	Hinduism	 has	 never	 been	 a	 political	 power	 the	way	Christianity	 has
been,	or	Islam	has	been.	Hinduism	has	existed	as	a	way	of	life,	as	a	philosophy,
but	with	no	political	power,	with	no	organisation	at	all.	It|	good	in	a	sense:	in	the
East	many	things	were	possible	because	of	this	unorganised	state	of	religion.
Rebels	could	exist.	Even	a	very	rebellious	school	of	mystics,	the	tantrikas,	could
exist	--	which	would	have	been	absolutely	impossible	in	the	West.	And	that	was
the	most	extreme,	rebellious	religion	ever;	it	sabotaged	the	whole	idea	of	the	so-
called	 religiousness.	 But	 still	 it	 existed	 openly;	 there	 was	 no	 need	 to	 go
underground.
It	was	 only	 recently,	when	Hinduism,	Buddhism	 and	 Jainism	 came	 in	 contact
with	Islam	and	Christianity,	that	they	started	becoming	organised	religions,	and
rebellious	spirits	became	more	and	more	impossible.
Alchemy	 is	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	Mystic	Schools.	 Its	 origins	 are	 really	 hidden	 far
away	in	prehistoric	times.
But	 the	 whole	 process	 depends	 on	 a	 single	 method,	 meditation.	 Meditation
contains	the	whole	science	of	alchemy.	It	is	the	beginning	and	the	end,	because
first	you	have	to	sort	out	what	is	matter	in	you	and	what	is	non-matter	in	you	--
that	is	the	beginning.	Unless	you	sort	it	out	you	will	remain	confused.
The	 whole	 confusion	 is	 that	 both	 are	 intermixed;	 matter	 has	 penetrated	 into
consciousness	 in	 many	 ways	 and	 consciousness	 has	 penetrated	 into	 matter	 in
many	ways.	 They	 have	 become	 so	 intertwined	 that	 it	 is	 almost	 impossible	 to
exactly	define	what	is	what.
And	 matter	 of	 course	 is	 visible,	 measurable	 --	 that's	 why	 it	 is	 called	 matter.
Matter	means	that	which	can	be	measured.	It	is	possible	for	others	to	observe	it,
it	 is	 objective.	 The	 word	 'objective'	 is	 beautiful;	 it	 means	 that	 which	 hinders,
objects.	 I	 won't	 allow	 you,	 it	 will	 hinder	 you,	 it	 will	 prove	 its	 existence,	 But
consciousness	 is	empty	 in	 that	way;	 it	does	not	object.	 It	 is	 like	an	open	door:
you	can	pass	through	it.	It	is	so	invisible	that	it	is	not	even	like	a	breeze;	it	won't
even	touch	you.	It	is	intangible.
That's	 why	 we	 become	 focussed	 on	 the	 body,	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 a	 certain
identity	arises	which	is	bodily:	we	start	thinking	of	ourselves	as	the	body.	We	are
not	the	body;	we	are	in	the	body	but	are	not	the	body.
The	body	only	houses	us,	shelters	us.	It	is	a	beautiful	shrine:	it	has	to	be	loved,
taken	care	of,	nourished,	not	neglected.	 It	has	 tremendous	possibilities,	but	 the
basic	thing	to	remember	is,	it	is	not	your	being.	The	first	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
step	of	meditation	is	to	demark	that	you	are	not	the	body.
So	meditation	starts	 in	observing	the	body	from	inside.	From	outside	you	have
observed	it;	everybody	has	observed	it	in	the	mirror	because	that	is	the	only	way
to	 observe	 your	 own	 body	 from	 outside.	 Others	 you	 can	 observe	 without	 the
mirror	because	your	eyes	function	as	mirrors,	but	your	eyes	cannot	function	as
mirrors	 for	 your	 own	body;	 hence	you	need	 a	mirror.	But	 the	mirror	 can	only
mirror	the	material	part	of	you
--	the	house,	not	the	resident.
There	is	a	beautiful	story	about	Alexander	--	 it	must	be	just	a	parable,	but	it	 is
very	famous	in	the	East	--
that	when	he	was	leaving	India...	He	has	gathered	tremendous	wealth	in	India	--
the	most	valuable	diamonds	and	emeralds	and	rubies...	He	met	a	fakir,	a	naked
fakir,	and	he	became	tremendously	interested	in	the	fakir.
There	was	something	in	him,	something	very	magnetic.	He	invited	him	to	come
with	him	as	a	royal	guest	 to	his	country	and	he	said,	 'Every	care	will	be	 taken
and	every	facility	will	be	provided.	You	will	be	treated	as	a	king.'
The	fakir	said,	'But	I	don't	see	that	you	have	anything	--	you	are	a	beggar,	I	am	a
king!	 Rather	 than	 trying	 to	 give	 something	 to	 me,	 it	 is	 better	 that	 you	 ask
something	from	me.'	And	he	said	it	with	such	authority	that	for	a	moment	even
Alexander	was	 silent.	He	 looked	 into	 his	 eyes:	 the	 fakir	meant	 it,	 he	was	 not
joking.
Alexander	said,	 'But	 I	don't	 see	 that	you	have	got	anything.'	Hanging	from	his
shoulder	the	fakir	had	just	a	small	bag	in	which	there	was	his	begging	bowl.	He
took	out	the	begging	bowl	and	inside	the	begging	bowl	there	was	a	small	mirror.
He	gave	it	to	Alexander	and	ho	said,	'Keep	it	with	you	and	you	will	know	what	I
mean.'
The	 story	 is	 that	when	Alexander	 looked	 into	 the	mirror	 it	 did	 not	 reflect	 his
body	but	his	 soul.	Now,	 this	must	be	a	story	because	no	mirror	can	 reflect	 the
soul,	 but	 it	 symbolises	 that	 the	mystic,	 the	 fakir,	must	 have	 initiated	 him	 into
meditation.	 Meditation	 is	 that	 mirror	 in	 which	 you	 can	 see	 your	 soul,	 your
consciousness,	that	which	you	are.
So	one	has	to	begin	to	watch	one's	own	body	from	the	inside.	For	example,	I	can
move	my	hand	without	being	conscious	of	it;	a	fly	comes	and	you	remove	it,	a
mosquito	 comes	 and	you	 remove	 it,	 and	you	go	on	doing	your	work.	Even	 in
sleep,	if	an	ant	starts	crawling	on	your	feet,	 the	feet	throw	it	off.	They	call	 it	a
conditioned	reflex.	Even	the	body	has	a	little	brain	of	its	own;	every	cell	has	a
little	brain	of	its	own,	automatic	and	autonomous;	it	works	on	its	own.	Otherwise
even	sleep	would	become	impossible,	everything	would	be	a	disturbance.	So	you
continue	 sleeping,	 your	 sleep	 is	 not	 disturbed;	 the	 ant	 is	 thrown	 away,	 the
mosquito	is	blown	away.	And	that's	exactly	what	you	go	on	doing	the	whole	day.
But	then	try	to	move	the	same	hand	with	inner	consciousness:	with	closed	eyes
move	 the	 hand	 very	 consciously,	 watching	 from	 the	 inside,	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised:	suddenly	there	is	a	grace,	you	can	feel	the	hand	moving,	from	inside
you	can	see	the	movement	of	the	hand.	And	certainly	the	seer	is	different	from
the	seen.
Walking,	 eating,	whatsoever	one	 is	 doing,	 one	 should	 start	watching	 the	body.
That	 is	 the	 first	 step	of	meditation:	watching	 the	body	 from	 the	 inside.	Slowly
slowly	a	distance	arises	between	the	watcher	and	the	watched,	and	the	confusion
starts	clearing	up.
When	you	are	perfectly	aware	that	you	are	not	the	body	then	the	second	step	has
to	 be	 taken:	 the	 watching	 of	 mind	 processes,	 which	 are	 a	 little	 more	 subtle;
hence	one	should	take	it	only	as	a	second	step.
Then	thoughts,	desires,	memories,	imagination,	dreams,	fantasies,	slowly	slowly
the	whole	panorama	of	the	mind	has	to	be	watched;	then	you	start	getting	out	of
the	entanglement	with	the	mind.	Just	as	you	got	out	of	the	body,	you	start	getting
out	of	the	mind;	more	clarity	arises	that	you	are	not	the	mind	either.
Then	the	third	step	is	to	watch	the	feelings,	the	emotions,	which	are	the	subtlest	-
-	the	heart.	They	are	subtler	than	thoughts;	they	are	very	vague,	very	elusive.	It	is
difficult	 to	catch	hold	of	them,	but	if	you	have	succeeded	in	the	first	 two	steps
then	the	third	also	becomes	possible	--	but	only	after	the	first	two.
The	process	is	the	same,	watching;	just	the	object	changes:	the	object	becomes
more	and	more	subtle,	more	and	more	inner.	And	when	you	have	succeeded	in
seeing	that	you	are	not	your	heart	either	--	your	emotions,	your	love,	your	hate,
your	 moods,	 sadness,	 joy	 --	 you	 are	 not	 even	 that,	 then	 a	 tremendous	 clarity
arises	in	you.
These	 are	 the	 three	 steps	which	make	 you	 aware	 of	 yourself;	 it	 is	 a	 clear-cut,
crystal-clear	awareness	of	the	self.
The	Jewish	story	is	that	Moses	asked	god	'My	people	will	ask	me	"Who	is	god?"
How	 am	 I	 to	 answer	 them?	What	 will	 I	 say?	 What	 is	 your	 name?'	 And	 the
answer	is	tremendously	significant;	in	fact	in	the	whole	Judaic	religion	there	is
nothing	 more	 important	 than	 that	 single	 statement.	 That	 contains	 the	 essence
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	meditation.	God	said	'Just	tell	those	people	?I	am	that	I	am."
Now	it	looks	very	absurd,	it	looks	like	&	tautology:	I	am	that	I	am.	But	that	is
the	state	of	meditation	--
when	you	have	become	aware	'I	am	not	the	body,	I	am	not	the	mind,	I	am	not	the
heart.'	Then	what	can	you	say?	--	only	'I	am	that	I	am.'
Buddha	 says	 this	 is	 the	 third	 step,	 and	 many	 religions	 have	 stopped	 here.	 I
perfectly	agree	with	him.	And	I	can	see	why	many	religions	have	stopped	here,
because	it	seems	one	has	arrived.	But	just	one	step	more	is	needed,	because	this
'I	am'	is	also	in	a	very	subtle	way,	a	thought,	a	feeling,	an	identity.
If	this	also	can	be	watched	then	one	reaches	the	ultimate,	and	that	state	is	called
parishuddha:	 the	 fourth,	 the	 ultimate	 purity	where	 nothing	 can	 be	 said;	 one	 is
simply	silent,	There	is	no	way	to	say	it,	no	way	to	express	it.
Lao	Tzu	says	'Truth	cannot	be	said,	and	the	moment	you	say	it,	you	have	already
falsified	it.'
Man	 can	 exist	 in	 two	 ways.	 Either	 he	 can	 exist	 in	 time...	 That's	 where	 we
ordinarily	exist,	but	in	time	there	is	death.	Time	is	bound	to	bring	death;	there	is
birth	and	there	is	death.	Man	can	also	exist	in	eternity,	then	there	is	no	birth	and
no	death.
The	cross	of	Jesus	represents	these	two	dimensions.	Christianity	has	completely
missed	the	significance	of	it.	The	cross	is	far	more	ancient	than	Christ.	In	fact	it
is	part	of	an	ancient	eastern	symbol,	the	swastika.	It	is	just	part	of	the	swastika,
not	 the	whole	 symbol.	By	 the	 time	 it	 reached	 the	western	world	 it	 lost	 a	 few
things,	but	the	essential	core	has	remained.
You	must	have	 seen	 the	 swastika	because	Adolf	Hitler	 chose	 it	 as	his	 symbol.
The	 swastika	or	 the	 cross	 is	made	by	 two	 lines;	one	 is	horizontal,	 the	other	 is
vortical.
The	 horizontal	 line	 represents	 time.	 Jesus'	 hands	 are	 spread	 on	 the	 horizontal
line.	Hands	represent	work,	and	work	is	possible	only	in	time.	And	Jesus'	whole
body	except	the	hands	is	hanging	on	the	vertical	line.	The	vertical	line	represents
eternity.
Time	moves	 in	 a	 sequence,	moment	 to	moment,	 in	 a	 line,	 it	 is	 linear.	You	 go
from	a	to	b,	from	b	to	c,	from	c	to	d	--	that's	how	time	moves.	If	you	want	to	take
a	jump	into	eternity	you	have	not	to	go	from	a	to	b;	you	have	to	jump	out	of	a	--
either	into	the	depths	or	towards	the	heights	--	you	have	to	move	vertically.
Mind	moves	 in	 time,	 and	hands	 are	 part	 of	mind.	This	 has	 been	very	 recently
discovered,	 that	 your	mind	 has	 two	 hemispheres.	One	 hemisphere	 is	 joined	 to
your	right	hand;	the	left	side	of	your	mind	is	joined	with	your	right	hand.	And
the	 right	 side	 of	 your	mind	 is	 joined	 to	 your	 left	 hand.	 Hands	 are	 the	 visible
extension	of	the	mind.
Jesus'	 body,	 particularly	 his	 hands,	 is	 spread	 on	 the	 horizontal	 line	 --	 that
represents	 time.	Work	 is	 dono	 by	 mind;	 hence	 schools,	 colleges,	 universities,
train	your	mind	because	society	needs	workers,	all	kinds	of	workers	 --	skilled,
unskilled,	but	society	needs	workers.
The	vertical	 line	represents	meditation.	It	 is	 jumping	out	of	 the	mind.	It	means
learning	how	to	remain	absolutely	inactive,	doing	nothing	for	a	few	moments.
The	Zen	people	say	 'sitting	silently,	doing	nothing,	spring	comes	and	 the	grass
grows	by	itself.'	You	have	only	to	sit	silently	doing	nothing,	and	everything	goes
on	happening	of	its	own	accord.	The	spring	will	come	and	the	grass	will	grow.
Just	 like	 that,	everything	 is	going	 to	happen;	you	need	not	do	 it.	Meditation	 is
not	something	that	has	to	be	done,	it	is	something	that	has	only	to	be	understood.
If	 you	 understand	meditation	 then	 that's	 enough:	 sitting	 silently	 anywhere	 you
can	fall	into	meditativeness.	Meditativeness	is	not	action	but	a	state	of	silence,	a
state	 of	 inaction	when	 everything	 stops:	 time	 stops,	 all	movement	 disappears,
you	are	 in	 total	 rest.	And	 those	are	 the	moments	when	you	know	 that	you	are
immortal,	 that	 only	 the	 body	will	 die;	 you	 are	 not	 going	 to	 die.	 Then	 all	 fear
disappears	 because	 all	 fear	 is	 rooted	 in	 death.	 And	 to	 be	 fearless	 is	 the	most
fundamental	thing	for	living	life	joyously.
The	 fearful	person	cannot	 live	 life	 joyously.	How	can	he?	 --	his	whole	energy
remains	entangled	with	fear,	he	is	continuously	afraid	of	everything.	He	cannot
love,	he	is	afraid	--	who	knows	where	it	will	land	him?	He	is	always	cautious,	on
guard.	 He	 is	 so	 cautious	 that	 he	 becomes	 crippled,	 paralysed.	 He	 is	 always
concerned	that	he	should	not	commit	any	mistake,	that	he	should	not	do	anything
wrong.	His	obsession	about	not	committing	a	mistake,	about	not	doing	anything
wrong,	about	not	going	astray,	becomes	so	heavy	that	he	stops	moving.	He	dies
before	death.	Then	he	lives	only	for	the	name	sake;	in	fact	he	vegetates,	he	does
not	 live.	 Then	 he	 is	 not	 a	man	 --	maybe	 a	 potato	 or	 a	 tomato	 or	 a	 banana	 --
anything,	but	not	a	man	at	all'
A	 man	 has	 to	 be	 adventurous,	 always	 on	 the	 go	 into	 the	 unknown,	 always
exploring	that	which	is	not	known,	always	taking	his	small	boat	of	life	into	the
uncharted	sea,	always	risking;because	he	knows	there	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
no	death,	so	there	is	no	fear	--	he	can	risk!	He	can	risk	everything.
And	sannyas	is	a	risk;	it	is	learning	the	adventure,	it	is	learning	the	art	of	living
dangerously.	But	a	person	can	live	dangerously	only	when	he	knows	that	there	is
no	death.	Then	to	live	dangerously	is	playful,	there	is	no	seriousness	about	it.	It
is	a	joy,	it	is	a	dance.
But	the	whole	thing	depends	on	one	thing,	that	one	should	have	some	experience
of	one's	 immortality,	of	 I	was	never	born	and	I	will	never	die.	This	 is	possible
through	meditation,	and	only	through	meditation.
So	learn	to	sit	silently,	doing	nothing	--	just	sitting	resting	in	yourself,	relaxing	in
yourself.	It	takes	a	little	time	because	we	have	been	brought	up	to	be	restless,	we
have	been	brought	up	by	people	who	have	been	restless	themselves.	They	have
poisoned	us,	they	have	corrupted	us,	not	knowingly,	not	intentionally	--
they	may	have	been	good	people,	they	may	have	even	tried	to	help	you,	but	they
were	 unconscious,	 and	 unconscious	 people	 cannot	 help,	 they	 can	 only	 harm.
Inspite	of	good	intentions	they	are	bound	to	harm.
They	 have	 made	 everybody	 restless,	 fidgety.	 Everybody	 is	 always	 running,
rushing,	 not	 knowing	 where,	 not	 knowing	 why,	 for	 what.	 Speed	 in	 itself	 has
become	important,	as	if	it	has	some	intrinsic	value.
I	used	to	live	with	a	professor	when	I	was	a	student	in	the	university.	He	was	a
very	busy	man	and	always	rushing	from	this	university	to	that,	from	this	country
to	 that.	He	was	a	visiting	professor	of	many	universities	all	over	 the	world,	on
many	consulting	boards...	always	on	the	run.
Whenever	 he	 was	 at	 home	 he	 would	 play	 chess,	 playing	 cards,	 monopoly	 --
stupid	things.	I	used	to	ask	him	why.	And	he	would	say	'To	kill	time.'
I	 said	 'This	 is	 strange:	 you	 don't	 go	 by	 train	when	 you	 have	 to	 go	 to	 another
town,	 you	 rush	 by	 aeroplane	 to	 save	 time.	 And	when	 time	 is	 saved	 you	 play
monopoly	to	kill	time'	And	you	think	you	are	a	professor	of	logic	and	philosophy
--	you	are	a	fool!	If	this	is	for	what	time	is	to	be	saved,	then	why	save	it	in	the
first	place?	Then	go	by	bullock	cart!	You	will	enjoy	the	scene	and	the	villages
and	so	many	things	on	the	way.
Journeying	by	aeroplane	is	not	really	a	journey.	You	enter	a	capsule	in	one	place,
you	get	out	of	the	capsule	in	another	place	to	save	time	--	and	then	what	do	you
do	with	the	time?
He	 said	 'You	 always	 create	 trouble	 for	 me.	 In	 fact	 in	 talking	 with	 you	 I	 feel
afraid	that	you	will	create	some	trouble.	Now	I	know	that	I	cannot	answer	you
you	are	right.'
He	died	in	a	plane	crash	finally,	I	had	been	telling	him	again	and	again	'You	will
die...'	 because	 in	 India,	 only	 a	 bullock	 cart	 is	 safe!...'you	 are	 running
unnecessarily.'	He	had	enough	money	and	I	would	ask	him,
'Why	do	you	go	on	like	 this?'	 'To	earn	money.'	And	I	said	 'You	don't	have	any
child.'
He	 used	 to	 give	me	money	 and	 I	 would	waste	 his	money.	 I	 told	 him	 'I	 don't
believe	in	money	or	anything	--	I	simply	waste	it.	If	you	give	me	money	I	will
waste	it.	Never	ask	me	"What	happened	to	it?"'
To	earn	money	he	was	going	 to	New	York	and	 to	Washington	and	 to	London,
and	 ho	 had	 no	 child,	 his	 wife	 was	 divorced.	 I	 was	 the	 only	 person	 who	 was
living	with	him	so	he	had	to	give	money	to	me	--	what	else	could	he	do	with	the
money?
I	said	to	him	'This	is	stupid:	you	have	enough	money	--	you	can	retire,	you	can
enjoy	 your	 life	 and	 play	 cards	 and	 chess	 and	 whatsoever	 you	 want.'	 But	 he
continued.	It	was	just	the	old	rut,	the	old	habit.
A	meditator	has	to	learn	to	do	only	the	essential	and	not	to	waste	one's	life	in	the
unessential.	A	meditator	has	 to	 learn	how	to	relax,	how	to	rest,	and	enjoy	rest.
And	slowly	slowly	one	settles	into	one's	own	centre.	And	the	moment	you	touch
your	own	centre	you	have	touched	eternity,	you	have	touched	timelessness,	you
have	tasted	nectar	for	the	first	time.
The	whole	of	religion	exists	for	this	experience.	If	religion	is	not	going	to	give
you	the	experience	of	the	immortal,	of	the	eternal,	then	it	is	absolutely	pointless.
My	sannyasins	are	going	to	taste	it.	They	are	moving	slowly	deeper	and	deeper
into	it,	relaxing	into	it.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	an	exploration	of	eternity.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
7	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007075
ShortTitle:	GWIND07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Sannyas	is	the	beginning	of	becoming	part	of	existence.	Ego	keeps	one	outside
of	it.	Ego	keeps	one	a	stranger,	an	outsider,	a	foreigner.	The	moment	we	drop	the
ego	 then	 nothing	 is	 foreign;	 then	 we	 are	 rooted	 in	 existence.	 There	 is	 no
separation	 anywhere.	We	breathe	 god	 in	 and	 out	 every	moment.	 It	 is	 god	 that
beats	 in	 our	 hearts,	 it	 is	 god	 that	 circulates	 in	 our	 blood	 --	 the	 same	 god	 that
flows	in	the	rivers,	rises	in	the	sun,	shines	in	the	moon.	It	is	all	one.
But	 the	 contemporary	man	 feels	 very	much	 of	 a	 stranger.	Never	 before	 has	 it
happened	on	such	a	vast	scale.	People,	a	few	people,	have	always	felt	strangers,
outsiders,	but	now	it	has	gone	to	epidemic	proportions;	almost	everybody	who	is
intelligent	feels	alienated,	uprooted,	feels	that	he	is	just	an	accident.
And	if	one	feels	'I	am	just	an	accident,'	life	cannot	be	a	joy,	life	cannot	become	a
contentment,	a	fulfilment.
Life	is	fulfilled	only	when	we	start	feeling	at	home	with	existence.	That's	what
sannyas	is	all	about:	helping	you	to	feel	at	home	with	existence,	with	the	trees,
with	the	earth,	with	the	sky,	with	people,	with	animals.	It	is	our	universe	and	we
are	not	foreigners	to	it.
Only	this	experience	makes	one	religious.
It	 is	 only	 through	 meditation	 that	 one	 starts	 feeling	 exalted,	 crowned;	 one
becomes	an	emperor.	A	man	who	has	not	known	the	taste	of	meditation	remains
a	beggar,	because	desires	are	nothing	but	a	continuous	begging,	asking	for	more.
Even	the	so-called	kings	and	emperors	are	beggars	--	maybe	bigger	beggars	than
the	small	ones	whom	you	meet	begging	on	the	streets	but	their	minds	function	in
the	 same	 way;	 there	 is	 the	 same	 desire	 for	 more.	 There	 is	 no	 qualitative
difference	between	a	beggar	and	a	king.
But	 meditation	 brings	 a	 revolution.	 As	 you	 go	 deeper	 into	 silence,	 desires
disappear.	 They	 exist	 only	 on	 the	 circumference,	 like	 waves	 existing	 on	 the
surface;	if	you	dive	deep	into	the	ocean	there	are	no	waves.	So	desires	are	just	on
the	circumference	of	 consciousness.	 If	you	dive	deep...	 the	deeper	you	go,	 the
farther	 away	 are	 the	 desires.	At	 the	 very	 centre	 of	 your	 being	 you	 completely
forget	that	desires	ever	existed;	they	look	like	dreams,	fantasies.
That	moment	is	the	most	exalted	moment,	the	entry	into	oneself.	Then	you	can
come	back	to	the	surface	but	you	cannot	lose	contact	with	the	centre.	Then	you
remain	centred	even	though	you	are	on	the	circumference.	Then	all	those	waves
are	just	games.	One	can	act	and	play,	and	beautifully	and	gracefully,	but	without
any	disturbance,	without	any	tension,	without	any	strain.	One	can	remain	in	the
marketplace	and	yet	in	tremendous	silence.	One	can	be	in	the	crowd	and	yet	be
absolutely	alone.
That's	the	most	fundamental	thing	in	sannyas:	to	be	in	the	world	and	yet	to	not
be	 of	 it;	 to	 be	 in	 the	world	 but	 not	 to	 allow	 the	world	 to	 be	 in	 you.	Then	 the
whole	 world	 becomes	 just	 a	 big	 stage,	 and	 all	 relationships	 are	 just	 a	 great
drama.	 Act	 as	 beautifully	 as	 you	 can,	 but	 remember	 it	 is	 all	 acting.	 Neither
anything	 is	 gained	 nor	 anything	 is	 lost,	 hence	 one	 remains	 undisturbed,
unperturbed.
A	sannyasin	becomes	the	centre	of	the	cyclone.
There	are	two	kinds	of	fame	in	the	world.	One	comes	through	outer	riches.	The
people	 who	 have	 political	 power	 are	 famous,	 the	 wealthy,	 the	 rich,	 like
Alexander	the	Great...	But	there	is	another	kind	of	fame	also	which	is	real	fame.
That	 happens	 to	 people	 who	 attain	 to	 inner	 richness:	 Jesus	 Christ,	 Gautam
Buddha,	Tao	Tzu.	These	people	are	famous	for	a	 totally	different	reason.	They
are	 not	 emperors,	 conquerors,	 but	 in	 a	 sense	 they	 are:	 they	 have	 conquered
themselves,	they	have	attained	to	the	inner	kingdom.	of	god.
The	 first	 kind	 of	 fame	 is	 ugly,	 it	 is	 violent:	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 has	 to	 kill
thousands	of	people;	Joseph	Stalin	kills	millions	of	people;	Adolf	Hitler	is	one	of
the	greatest	murderers	history	has	ever	known.	These	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
people	are	mad!	They	become	famous	but	they	are	unhealthy,	pathological;	they
bring	misery	into	the	world.	They	themselves	are	miserable	and	they	create	great
misery	in	others.	 If	 they	had	not	been,	 the	world	would	have	been	far	better	--
they	are	calamities.
But	Buddha,	Christ,	Tao	Tzu	--	these	people	arc	blessings	to	the	world.	Without
them	humanity	would	not	have	progressed	at	all;	 they	are	 the	salt	of	 the	earth.
Life	has	 some	meaning	because	of	 them,	 some	poetry,	 some	music	because	of
them.	 They	 made	 themselves	 blissful	 and	 they	 spread	 the	 secrets	 of	 being
blissful	into	the	world.
So	choose	the	right	kind	of	fame.	Don't	choose	the	wrong	kind	of	fame.	Become
blissful,	 peaceful,	 serene,	 because	 you	 can	 give	 to	 others	 only	 that	which	 you
have	 got	 already	 in	 the	 first	 place.	 Become	 a	 source	 of	 bliss	 and	 blessing	 to
others.
Religion	is	 the	science	of	bliss.	True	religion	is	not	based	on	beliefs;	 it	 is	only
the	untrue	religion	that	is	based	on	beliefs.	True	religion	is	rooted	in	experience;
hence	 I	 don't	 want	 my	 sannyasins	 to	 believe	 in	 anything,	 not	 even	 in	 the
existence	 of	 god,	 because	 all	 kinds	 of	 belief	 are	 barriers	 in	 experiencing	 the
truth.
If	 you	 already	 believe	 you	 stop	 enquiring.	 Once	 the	 belief	 is	 there	 you	 start
thinking	that	you	already	know.	Belief	simply	means	you	have	repressed	all	your
doubts	--	and	enquiry	can	begin	only	if	your	doubts	are	alive,	fresh,	young.
Doubts	are	not	 to	be	repressed.	They	have	to	be	used	as	stepping	stones.	They
are	not	bad,	nothing	is	wrong	in	them,	but	one	should	not	live	in	doubts	forever.
One	should	use	the	doubts	to	find	out	the	truth.
There	 are	 two	kinds	 of	 believers	 in	 the	world:	 the	 believers	 in	 beliefs	 and	 the
believers	in	doubt.	Both	are	believers,	The	believers	in	belief	are	called	theists.
There	are	different	kind	of	theists,	they	come	in	all	sizes	and	shapes:	Christians,
Hindus,	 Mohammedans.	 And	 there	 are	 believers	 in	 doubt,	 they	 are	 called
atheists.	They	also	have	different	shapes,	different	colours:	 there	are	anarchists
and	there	are	communists	and	there	are	fascists.	But	they	both	agree	on	one	point
--	that	there	is	no	need	to	enquire.
One	 believes	 in	 god,	 one	 believes	 god	 is	 not,	 but	 both	 have	 come	 to	 a
conclusion.	And	how	have	they	come	to	a	conclusion?	They	have	not	explored,
they	have	not	gone	within	themselves,	they	have	not	searched	far.	They	have	not
even	 remained	 open	 to	 truth,	 they	 have	 become	 closed.	 Every	 conclusion
without	your	Own	experience	closes	you.
My	sannyasins	have	to	learn	to	remain	open.	I	don't	teach	you	belief	or	disbelief;
I	 teach	 you	 enquiry,	 and	 enquiry	 is	 always	 scientific.	 And	 I	 trust	 in	 enquiry
because	 I	 know:	 if	 you	 really	 enquire	 you	 will	 find	 god;	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to
believe.
When	 I	 know	 that	 the	 sky	 is	 full	 of	 stars,	why	 should	 I	 tell	 you	 to	 believe?	 I
invite	 you	 to	 come	 out	 of	 your	 room	 and	 see	 for	 yourself	 --	 I	 trust	 my
experience,	hence	I	can	trust	your	enquiry.
It	is	the	priests	who	have	not	known	god,	who	have	not	known	the	starry	night
outside,	who	 have	 never	 gone	 outside	 their	minds,	who	 are	 afraid	 of	 enquiry.
They	 are	 afraid	 because	 they	 themselves	 are	 suspicious,	 they	 themselves	 are
suspicious,	 they	 themselves	 have	 doubts	 --	 repressed	 but	 lurking	 somewhere.
They're	repressed,	but	in	moments	of	weakness	they	start	surfacing.	Hence	they
want	everybody	else	to	believe.
They	are	afraid	of	questioning,	they	are	afraid	of	asking	anything.
Asking	 seems	 to	 them	 to	 be	 disobedience,	 questions	 seem	 to	 them	 to	 be
irreligious:	 you	 should	 simply	 believe	 whatsoever	 they	 say...	 because	 they
themselves	have	not	experienced.
God	is,	truth	is,	tao	is	--	there	is	no	need	to	believe	at	all.	Just	open	the	doors	and
the	windows	and	 let	 the	wind	and	 the	 rain	and	 the	 sun	come	 in,	 and	 they	will
give	you	a	glimpse	of	the	outside	world,	of	the	tremendously	beautiful	existence.
They	will	become	invitations	from	the	ultimate.	Then	go	and	explore	with	 joy,
with	thrill.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 adventurers,	 explorers.	 One	 day	 they	 are	 bound	 to
find.	And	when	you	yourself	find,	it	has	a	totally	different	significance,	it	has	a
totally	different	quality	to	it.	It	is	not	impotent	belief,	it	is	living	truth,	it	is	your
truth	--	you	can	risk	your	life	for	it.
Jesus	could	die	so	easily	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	knew.	If	he	had	been	just
a	 believer	 he	 would	 have	 wavered,	 he	 would	 have	 escaped.	 There	 was	 every
possibility	 to	escape.	He	need	not	have	gone	 to	 the	capital	city.	Rumours	were
coming	that	he	would	be	caught;	he	knew	everything.	It	was	almost	certain	that
he	was	going	to	be	caught	--	he	could	have	escaped...
Socrates	 would	 not	 have	 died	 so	 willingly.	 The	 court	 even	 offered	 him	 the
opportunity	 to	escape:	 'If	you	 leave	Athens	we	won't	punish	you,	but	 then	you
cannot	 come	 back	 to	 Athens.	 Simply	 leave	 the	 town.'	 If	 he	 had	 been	 just	 a
believer	hc	would	have	 escaped	 from	 the	 town;	 life	 is	 far	more	 important.	He
could	have	lived	somewhere	else.	Athens	was	not	the	whole	world,	just	a	city	--
the	whole	world	was	there.	But	he	said	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
'I	know	whatsoever	I	am	saying	is	true	and	I	am	ready	to	risk	all	for	it.'	The	court
could	feel	the	sincerity	of	the	man;	he	was	ready	to	sacrifice	his	life	--	they	gave
him	another	opportunity.
They	said,	'Then	do	one	thing:	live	in	Athens	if	you	insist,	but	stop	talking	about
your	philosophy.'	He	said,	'That	I	cannot	do.	That	is	my	business.	That	I	cannot
stop.	For	that	you	will	have	to	kill	me.	While	I	am	alive	I	am	going	to	spread	the
truth	because	that	is	the	whole	purpose	of	my	being	alive.	Otherwise	what	is	the
point	of	being	alive?	--	then	death	is	far	better.'
He	refused	both	opportunities.	This	would	not	have	been	possible	if	he	had	been
only	a	man	of	belief.
He	trusted	his	enquiry,	he	trusted	his	own	experience.
One's	own	experience	is	so	valuable,	one	can	sacrifice	everything	for	it.
Bliss	is	the	greatest	blessing	in	life.	Without	knowing	bliss	one	lives	in	vain;	in
fact	one	does	not	live	but	only	vegetates,	one	only	dies.	What	we	ordinarily	call
life	is	nothing	but	a	gradual	process	of	death.
From	the	moment	of	birth	we	start	dying.	Every	day,	one	day	less;	time	goes	on
slipping	out	of	one's	fingers	like	water.	This	is	not	life	because	it	ends	only	in	the
graveyard.
You	may	go	in	any	direction,	you	may	do	any	kind	of	work,	but	every	road	leads
to	the	grave.	The	proverb	is	that	every	road	leads	to	Rome	--	I	don't	know	why,
unless	 Rome	 is	 another	 name	 for	 the	 graveyard!	 Every	 road	 leads	 to	 the
graveyard...	and	in	fact,	Rome	is	a	graveyard,	particularly	the	Vatican	City.	It	is
where	Christ	has	really	been	crucified,	it	is	where	he	is	buried.
Our	life	is	not	worth	calling	life.	Life	starts	only	when	you	start	moving	in	the
dimension	beyond	death.
That's	what	meditation	is	for:	a	strategy,	a	device,	a	ladder,	to	go	beyond	death.
And	 just	a	glimpse	of	 the	beyond	 is	enough.	Then	you	know	only	 the	body	 is
going	to	die,	not	you,	and	only	the	body	is	born,	not	you.	You	were	here	before
your	birth	and	you	will	be	here	after	your	death.	You	are	part	of	eternity.
When	 one	 experiences	 this,	 life	 becomes	 blissful,	 and	 in	 that	 blissfulness	 one
feels	that	god	has	blessed	one.	Then	naturally,	spontaneously,	gratitude	arises.	I
call	 that	 gratitude	 prayer.	All	 other	 prayers	 are	 pseudo.	 The	 real	 prayer	 arises
only	when	you	have	experienced	bliss	and	the	blessing	of	it.	Then	naturally	you
have	to	be	thankful,	you	have	to	bow	down	to	existence.	You	feel	what	a	gift	has
been	given	to	you	--
and	 you	 had	 not	 asked	 for	 it,	 you	 don't	 even	 deserve	 it.	 Nobody	 deserves	 it,
nobody	is	worthy	of	it,	but	god	gives	out	of	his	abundance.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007085
ShortTitle:	GWIND08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	 most	 significant	 thing	 about	 bliss	 is	 the	 it	 is	 intrinsically	 a	 paradox	 and
because	of	its	paradoxical	nature	it	has	almost	always	been	misunderstood.	The
paradox	is:	man	needs	to	make	much	effort,	and	yet	it	does	not	happen	because
of	 the	 effort	 it	 always	 happens	 as	 a	 gift	 of	 god.	But	without	 effort	man	 never
becomes	capable	of	receiving	the	gift.	Even	though	the	gift	is	always	available,
man	remains	closed.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
So	the	whole	human	endeavour	is	not	really	the	cause	of	attaining	bliss,	it	cannot
cause	bliss;	it	can	only	remove	the	barriers.	It	is	a	negative	process.	It	is	as	if	you
are	 living	 in	 a	 closed	 room,	all	 the	windows,	 all	 the	doors	 closed:	 the	 sun	has
risen	but	you	are	in	darkness.	The	sun	cannot	rise	because	of	your	efforts.
Whatsoever	you	do	you	cannot	make	the	sun	rise,	but	you	can	open	your	doors
or	keep	them	closed	--	that	much	depends	on	your	effort.	If	you	open	the	doors
the	 sun	 becomes	 available	 to	 you,	 otherwise	 it	 waits	 just	 on	 your	 doorsteps,
without	even	knocking.	You	can	live	in	darkness	for	eternity	--	can	and	all	that
was	needed	was	to	remove	the	barrier	between	you	and	the	sun.
Exactly	the	same	is	the	case	with	bliss.	God	is	always	showering	bliss,	it	is	his
nature.	Bliss	is	intrinsic	to	existence.	It	is	not	something	that	happens	once	in	a
while,	it	is	not	seasonal;	it	is	its	intrinsic	nature,	its	very	innermost	core.	So	it	is
always	there,	but	it	is	not	available	to	us	because	we	are	not	available	to	it.
Because	 of	 this	 paradoxical	 nature	 there	 have	 been	 two	 kinds	 of
misunderstanding.	 There	 have	 been	 people	 who	 have	 said	 that	 because	 bliss
always	happens	through	the	gift	of	god	as	a	gift,	as	a	grace,	then	there	is	no	need
to	make	any	effort,	 so	whenever	 it	happens	 it	happens;	we	cannot	do	anything
about	it.
These	are	the	fatalists,	this	is	the	fatalists'	fallacy.	They	think	that	whenever	god
decides,	it	will	happen;	before	that	no	effort	on	our	part	is	going	to	help,	so	why
make	unnecessary	effort?	These	people	will	remain	always	in	misery	--	bliss	will
never	happen.
The	 other	 extreme	 is	 the	 people	 who	 think	 that	 some	 effort	 is	 absolutely
necessary,	without	 effort	 it	 cannot	happen.	So	 they	go	on	making	efforts,	with
the	 fallacious	 notion	 that	 it	 is	 by	 their	 efforts	 only	 that	 they	 will	 be	 able	 to
achieve	 it.	They	 remain	obsessed	with	 their	 effort.	This	 is	 the	 fallacy	of	yoga.
Great	endeavour	--	body	postures,	psychological	techniques,	fasting,	austerities...
People	 go	 on	 doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 things,	 and	 they	 completely	 forget	 that
whatsoever	they	are	doing	is	unnecessary,	it	is	not	needed.
Exactly	 between	 these	 two	 extremes	 is	 the	 right	 path:	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 effort	 is
needed	 and	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 trust	 is	 needed;	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 effort	 to	 remove	 the
barriers,	and	a	little	bit	of	trust,	patience,	awaiting,	'God	is	gracious,	so	whenever
my	barrier	is	removed	and	I	am	ready,	it	is	bound	to	happen,	it	is	inevitable.'
This	is	my	approach,	the	golden	mean:	to	walk	exactly	in	the	middle	between	the
polar	 opposites.	Mind	 always	 chooses	 the	 extreme.	 The	mind	 is	 an	 extremist;
from	one	extreme	it	goes	to	the	other.	First	it	will	make	all	kinds	of	efforts,	then
it	will	fail	--	it	is	bound	to	fail	--	then	it	will	move	to	the	other	extreme,	it	will
drop	all	effort.	That	too	will	not	succeed;	then	sooner	or	later	it	will	move	again
to	the	first	extreme.	In	this	way,	like	a	pendulum,	the	mind	goes	on	moving	from
right	to	left,	from	left	to	right;	sometimes	it	is	leftist,	sometimes	it	is	rightist,	but
it	is	never	in	the	middle.
If	 the	pendulum	stops	 in	 the	middle,	 the	clock	stops.	 If	your	mind	stops	 in	 the
middle,	 your	 inner	 clock	 also	 stops,	 time	 disappears,	 mind	 itself	 disappears.
Suddenly	 you	 are	 showered	 with	 infinite	 bliss.	 From	 all	 directions?	 from	 all
sources,	from	all	planes	bliss	starts	rushing	towards	you	in	millions	of	streams.
Love	 in	 fact	 is	 always	great.	 If	 it	 exists,	 it	 is	great;	 if	 it	 is	 small,	 it	 exists	not.
There	 is	nothing	 like	small	 love	 --	 that	 is	a	contradiction	 in	 terms.	 It	 is	 just	as
you	cannot	say	'the	small	sky';	if	it	is	small	it	is	not	the	sky,	if	it	is	sky	it	is	not
small.	Sky	means	the	vast,	the	unbounded,	the	infinite.	So	is	the	case	with	love:
greatness	is	part	of	it,	vastness	is	its	very	flavour.
That's	why	our	so-called	love	is	not	really	love.	It	is	too	small,	it	is	too	confined,
too	conditional,	too	demanding.	It	gets	suffocated;	in	fact	it	commits	suicide.
I	 see	 almost	 everybody's	 committing	 suicide.	And	 then	 life	 becomes	 a	 desert;
then	one	feels	that	there	is	no	meaning,	no	poetry,	no	music,	that	all	is	futile.	But
in	fact	we	are	responsible	for	that	desertlike,	juiceless	existence.
Love	 is	 the	very	 juice.	Without	 love	we	are	dry.	With	 love	we	are	green;	with
love	there	is	foliage,	flowers,	fruits,	with	love	there	is	growth.	But	love	can	only
be	great.	And	the	problem	is	that	we	want	to	maintain	something	impossible:	we
want	love	and	we	also	want	to	protect	our	ego.
Now,	ego	is	intrinsically	small,	just	as	love	is	intrinsically	great.	They	cannot	be
partners,	they	cannot	co-exist.	And	this	is	what	everybody	is	trying	to	do:	asking
for	 the	 impossible	 which	 has	 never	 happened	 and	 which	 is	 never	 going	 to
happen	because	it	is	against	the	tao,	against	the	law	of	nature,	against	dhamma.
Either	you	have	to	choose	the	ego	or	you	have	to	choose	love	--	you	cannot	have
both.	And	in	 this	conflict	between	the	ego	and	love,	ninety-nine	point	nine	per
cent	of	people	choose	the	ego,	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	is	small,	manageable,
controllable,	within	your	grasp.	You	feel	safer,	secure.	It	feels	like	a	small,	cosy
hut.	Of	course	the	vast	sky	of	love	is	beautiful,	full	of	stars,	but	one	feels	afraid,
sacred,	 to	go	 into	 such	a	vast	unknown	 territory	which	goes	on	and	on,	which
will	possess	you;	you	cannot	possess	it.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Ego	 can	 be	 possessed,	 love	 cannot	 be	 possessed.	 With	 love	 you	 have	 to
understand	one	thing:	You	will	have	to	be	possessed	by	love	--	love	is	vaster	than
you	 --	 so	 love	 will	 take	 whole	 possession	 of	 you.	 Unless	 one	 is	 ready	 to
surrender	totally,	one	cannot	know	what	love	is.	And	without	knowing	love	one
never	comes	to	know	what	life	is	either.	Then	all	 talk	of	god	is	mere	talk.	You
don't	know	lire,	you	don't	know	love	--
how	can	you	know	god?	God	is	the	ultimate	crescendo	of	life	and	love.	It	is	the
highest	peak	of	life	and	love.
Sannyas	means	becoming	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown,	to	go	into	the	great,	into
the	vast,	 to	go	 into	 the	uncharted,	going	 into	 the	ocean	with	a	small	boat.	The
other	shore	 is	not	known;	 in	 fact	 there	 is	no	other	shore	 --	 it	 is	 just	ocean	and
ocean	and	ocean.	But	the	very	adventure	creates	the	soul.
Gurdjieff	 used	 to	 say	 that	 people	 are	 not	 born	with	 a	 soul;	 the	 soul	 has	 to	 be
earned,	 deserved.	 It	 belongs	 to	 only	 those	 few	 rare	 people	who	 risk,	 who	 are
gamblers.
The	businesslike	person	has	no	soul	at	all.	He	lives	a	soulless	existence.	Because
of	his	calculations	he	always	remains	within	the	boundaries.
Sannyas	means	always	being	ready	to	go	beyond	the	boundaries,	always	leaving
the	known	behind,	searching	for	 the	unknown.	The	very	search	gives	 integrity,
the	 very	 search	 creates	 a	 centre	 in	 you;	 otherwise	 people	 remain	 without	 a
centre,	just	a	circumference.
Learn	the	art	of	great	love	--	that	is	the	very	foundation	of	true	religion.	Those
who	have	known	love	have	known	all,	those	who	have	missed	love	have	missed
all.
Meditation	 is	 not	 serious,	 as	 it	 is	 ordinarily	 thought	 to	 be;	 it	 is	 a	 song,	 it	 is	 a
dance,	it	is	a	celebration.
The	serious	person	can	never	go	beyond	the	mind.	It	is	the	mind	that	is	serious.
Mind	 does	 not	 know	 how	 to	 take	 things	 playfully;	 even	 while	 playing,	 mind
becomes	serious.	You	can	watch	chess	players:	they	become	utterly	serious,	far
more	serious	than	you	will	find	anybody	else	in	the	world.	Many	chess	players
go	mad	because	of	seriousness.
There	 is	 an	 ancient	 Sufi	 story	 of	 an	Egyptian	 king	who	was	 a	 great	 player	 of
chess.	He	went	mad.	All	kinds	of	treatments	were	tried	--	nothing	worked.	His
condition	was	deteriorating	every	day.	Finally	a	mystic,	whom	the	king	used	to
visit,	came	to	know	about	the	problem.	He	said,	'This	is	very	simple.	Find	some
great	chess	player	and	pay	him	whatsoever	he	asks	for	--	because	he	will	ask	a
fabulous	 price,	 otherwise	who	would	 be	 ready	 to	 play	 chess	with	 a	madman?
Give	him	whatsoever	he	wants	but	let	him	play	chess	with	the	king.	And	come
back	after	one	year...'
They	found	the	champion	of	chess	players.	He	really	asked	an	almost	impossible
sum	 of	money	 --	 they	 agreed.	 Out	 of	 greed	 he	 started	 playing	 chess	with	 the
madman.	After	one	year	they	went	to	see	the	mystic;	he	asked,	'How	are	things?'
They	said,	'Things	are	perfectly	good.	The	king	has	regained	his	sanity,	but	that
chess	player	has	gone	mad!'
The	mind	 is	basically	serious.	Playing	cards,	people	become	so	serious	 --	 start
cheating,	deceiving,	they	become	dishonest.	If	they	lose	a	game	they	are	ready	to
fight.	Sometimes	people	have	killed	just	because	of	chess	or	playing	cards;	some
stupid	game	and	they	have	shot	each	other!
Mind	cannot	take	anything	playfully:	even	in	ordinary	games	it	becomes	serious.
Meditation	is	not	anything	of	the	mind,	it	is	something	beyond	the	mind.	And	the
first	step	is	to	be	playful	about	it.	If	you	are	playful	about	it	mind	cannot	destroy
your	meditation.	Otherwise	it	will	turn	it	into	another	ego	trip;	it	will	make	you
very	 serious.	You	will	 start	 thinking,	 'I	 am	 a	 great	meditator.	 I	 am	holier	 than
other	 people,	 and	 the	 whole	 world	 is	 just	 worldly	 --	 I	 am	 religious,	 I	 am
virtuous.'	That's	what	has	happened	 to	 thousands	of	 so-called	 saints,	moralists,
puritans:	they	are	just	playing	ego	games,	subtle	ego	games.
Hence	I	want	to	cut	the	very	root	of	it	from	the	very	beginning.	Be	playful	about
it.	It	is	a	song	to	be	sung,	a	dance	to	be	danced.	Take	it	as	fun	and	you	will	be
surprised:	if	you	can	be	playful	about	meditation,	meditation	will	grow	in	leaps
and	bounds.
But	you	are	not	hankering	for	any	goal;	you	are	just	enjoying	sitting	silently,	just
enjoying	the	very	act	of	sitting	silently	--	not	that	you	are	longing	for	some	yogic
powers,	siddhis,	miracles.	All	that	is	nonsense,	the	same	old	nonsense,	the	same
old	game,	played	with	new	words,	on	a	new	plane.
His	may	be	the	only	commune	in	the	whole	world	where	meditation	is	taught	as
fun,	as	joy,	playfulness,	where	we	are	not	taking	it	seriously	at	all.	We	are	taking
everything	with	great	laughter.	Life	as	such	has	to	be	taken	as	a	cosmic	joke	--
and	then	suddenly	you	relax	because	there	is	nothing	to	be	tense	about.	And	in
that	 very	 relaxation	 something	 starts	 changing	 in	 you	 --	 a	 radical	 change,	 a
transformation	 --	 and	 the	 small	 things	 of	 life	 start	 having	 new	meaning,	 new
significance.	Then	nothing	is	small,	everything	starts	taking	on	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
a	 new	 flavour,	 a	 new	 aura;	 one	 starts	 feeling	 a	 kind	 of	 godliness	 everywhere.
One	 does	 not	 become	 a	 Christian	 here,	 does	 not	 become	 a	 Hindu,	 does	 not
become	a	Mohammedan;	one	 simply	becomes	 a	 lover	of	 life.	One	 learns	only
one	thing	here,	how	to	rejoice	in	life.
But	rejoicing	in	life	is	the	way	towards	god.	Dance	your	way	to	god,	laugh	your
way	to	god,	sing	your	way	to	god!	And	god	must	be	tired	of	your	serious	saints
by	now	or	centuries	those	stupid	guys...	Either	he	must	have	committed	suicide,
seeing	all	 those	saints	--	 I	cannot	even	keep	their	pictures	 in	my	room	--	or	he
must	have	gone	mad,	or	he	must	have	escaped.
It	 is	 impossible	 to	 conceive	 god	 living	 with	 all	 those	 Christian,	 Hindu,	 Jaina
saints	 --	 impossible	 to	 conceive.	 If	you	 look	at	 life,	 if	 this	 life	 is	 a	 creation	of
god,	 if	 this	 life	 is	 the	 expression	 of	 god,	 then	 god	 is	 a	 dancing	 god,	 full	 of
flowers	 and	 fragrance,	 full	 of	 songs	 --	 very	 creative,	 very	 sensitive	 --	 full	 of
music...	If	this	life	is	any	proof	--	and	except	for	this	life	there	is	no	other	proof	-
-	then	god	cannot	be	a	serious	person.
I	always	 love	 to	 relate	a	 story	about	a	Hassid	 fakir's	 last	moments.	Zusya	was
dying	 --	 and	 for	 his	whole	 life	 he	 laughed	 and	 joked	 and	danced...	 I	 love	 that
kind	of	person;	to	have	such	a	man	as	company	is	a	blessing.	But	the	elders	of
the	society	were	worried	about	him.
When	 he	was	 dying	 somebody	 asked	 him,	 'Zusya,	 have	 you	made	 your	 peace
with	 god?	 Or	 have	 you	 wasted	 your	 life	 dancing,	 singing,	 joking,	 fooling
around?'	Zusya	opened	his	 eyes	 and	hc	 said	 'But	 I	 have	never	 quarrelled	with
him,	so	why	should	I	make	peace	with	him?	I	have	never	quarrel	ed	with	him;
we	 have	 been	 always	 on	 good	 terms.	 Sometimes	 I	 tell	 jokes	 --	 he	 laughs;
sometimes	he	tells	jokes	--	I	laugh.
Things	have	been	going	very	well.
And	 I	 have	 saved	 a	 few	 jokes	 which	 I	 have	 never	 told	 anybody;	 they	 are
especially	for	him,	because	I	know	when	I	arrive	there	he	will	ask	"Zusya,	what
have	you	brought?"	I	have	saved	a	few	jokes	especially	for	him!	What	else?	I	am
a	poor	man,'	Zusya	said,	'what	else	I	can	keep,	to	take	with	me	as	an	offering?
Prayer	he	has	heard	enough	of,	serious	people	he	must	have	seen	enough	of.'
Nobody	knows	how	Zusya	was	 received,	but	 I	can	say	with	absolute	authority
that	nobody	has	been	received	with	such	joy	as	Zusya!
This	is	the	way	of	a	truly	religious	man.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007095
ShortTitle:	GWIND09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
For	man	there	are	only	two	possibilities	of	existing	in	the	world:	one	is	through
the	mind	and	the	other	is	through	meditation.	Through	the	mind	there	is	misery,
anxiety,	 anguish,	 death;	 through	 meditation	 there	 is	 bliss,	 benediction,
immortality,	godliness.	And	the	choice	is	always	yours.
Man	always	stands	on	the	crossroad.	Each	moment	is	a	crossroad.	You	can	turn
towards	the	mind	or	you	can	turn	towards	meditation.	And	means	living	in	the
past.	 Mind	 is	 an	 accumulation	 of	 ail	 the	 experiences,	 memories,	 which	 have
passed.	They	are	no	more	in	existence;	only	traces	are	left	on	your	memory	film.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Memory	 is	 exactly	 a	 recording	mechanism.	 It	 is	 very	 talented	 and	has	 infinite
capacity,	almost	infinite.
One	simple	memory	system	can	 record	all	 the	 information	contained	 in	all	 the
libraries	of	the	world.	But	memory	means	that	which	is	no	more.
Because	we	live	in	the	past	we	project	a	future.	The	future	is	a	by-product	of	the
past.	The	 future	also	does	not	exist;	 it	 is	another	non-existential	 thing	 just	 like
the	past.	At	 least	 the	past	has	been	--	 the	future	has	yet	 to	be.	And	whatsoever
you	can	conceive	of	the	future	is	just	a	reflection	of	your	past,	a	modified	past.
You	would	like	all	the	pleasures	that	you	lived	through	in	the	past,	magnified,	on
a	bigger	 scale,	 and	you	would	 like	 to	drop	all	 the	miseries	 that	you	had	 to	go
through	in	the	past.	Your	future	is	a	selected	past:	that	which	you	like	you	project
and	 that	 which	 you	 don't	 like	 you	 reject.	 But	 the	 problem	 is	 that	 in	 life
everything	is	intertwined	with	everything	else.	You	cannot	choose	the	nice	part
and	reject	the	bitter	part	--
that	is	impossible.	They	are	one	parcel,	they	come	together.
If	you	choose	anything	from	the	past	thinking	that	it	was	beautiful,	you	have	also
chosen	the	ugly.
Whether	you	like	it	or	not	is	not	the	question;	it	will	come	inevitably	--	just	as
days	are	with	nights.	You	cannot	choose	 the	day	and	drop	 the	night;	 the	night
and	day	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	phenomenon.	You	cannot	choose	one	aspect
of	the	coin.	You	can	hide	the	other,	but	it	 is	there,	and	sooner	or	later	you	will
have	to	give	it	its	due.	And	if	you	want	your	pleasures	to	be	on	a	bigger	scale,
your	misery	will	grow	in	the	same	proportion.	That	is	the	dilemma	man	goes	on
living,	 suffering,	 hoping	 that	 some	miracle	will	 happen	 and	he	will	 be	 able	 to
choose	only	the	roses	without	the	thorns.	But	they	come	together!
But	there	is	a	totally	different	way	of	life,	a	different	style	--	and	that	is	to	live	in
the	 present.	 That's	 what	 I	 call	 meditation.	 Meditation	 is	 an	 opening	 into	 the
present,	dropping	the	whole	past	without	any	choice.	If	you	can	drop	the	whole
past,	future	disappears.	Then	there	is	no	future,	future	evaporates,	and	all	that	is
left	is	the	existential	moment.	This	moment	is	all	 there	is:	now,	here.	And	then
life	starts	moving	in	a	different	dimension,	altogether	different;	then	you	are	on
an	adventure,	because	you	have	never	know	the	present.	It	is	the	most	unknown
phenomenon	in	life.
It	seems	strange	that	the	only	thing	that	is	existential	is	the	most	unknown.	And
the	non-existential	is	very	much	known;	you	go	on	brooding	about	the	past	and
the	future.	Mind	is	a	brooding	about	the	non-existential;	meditation	is	living	the
existential.	And	the	moment	your	whole	being	is	herenow,	god	is.
God	is	existence,	another	name	for	existence,	and	the	present	is	a	door	into	his
temple	the	only	door.	There	are	no	other	doors.
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	 means	 to	 live	 your	 life	 moment-to-moment,	 without	 any
expectation	because	all	expectations	come	from	the	past.	And	when	there	are	no
expectations,	there	are	no	frustrations	either.
Living	moment-to-moment	means	 living	a	 life	 always	 fresh,	young,	 alive.	The
past	makes	you	old,	dull,	dead,	the	more	it	gathers	on	you	--	and	it	is	gathering
every	 moment.	 It	 is	 like	 dust	 gathering	 on	 a	 mirror:	 soon	 you	 cannot	 see
anything	in	the	mirror.
That's	how	we	are	live	--	 like	blind	persons	because	we	cannot	see	a	anything,
we	 cannot	 feel	 anything,	 we	 cannot	 experience	 anything.	 All	 beautiful	 things
have	become	mere	words;	 love,	god,	bliss	are	 just	words.	People	use	 them	but
they	 know	 that	 they	 don't	 mean	 anything.	 Meaning	 can	 come	 only	 through
experience,	and	the	only	experience	possible	is	of	the	present.
But	always	remember:	once	you	have	lived	the	moment	it	is	past.	Then	drop	it;
howsoever	beautiful	it	was,	don't	cling	to	it.	When	it	is	no	more,	it	is	no	more.
That's	what	Jesus	means	when	he	says	'Let	the	dead	bury	their	dead.'
The	past	is	dead.	Go	on	dying	to	the	past	--	and	every	moment	die	to	the	past	so
that	 every	 moment	 you	 are	 born	 anew.	 That's	 the	 way	 of	 sannyas.	 Then	 you
know	what	a	gift	life,	what	a	splendour,	what	a	joy	to	be...	Just	to	be	is	enough,
more	than	enough!	It	is	such	a	benediction	that	we	cannot	repay	existence	in	any
way;	we	can	only	feel	grateful.
Sannyas	is	a	pilgrimage	from	bliss	to	bliss,	from	perfection	to	perfection,	from
life	to	more	abundant	life.
The	ancient	seers	of	the	Upanishads	have	a	beautiful	prayer.	It	is	one	of	the	most
beautiful	 prayers	 ever	 uttered.	 The	 prayer	 is	 tamsoma	 jyotirgamaya	 --	Oh	my
lord,	lead	me	from	darkness	to	light;	astoma	sadgamaya	--	Oh	my	lord,	lead	me
from	untruth	into	truth;	mrityorma	amritam	gamaya	--	Oh	my	lord,	lead	me	from
death	to	deathlessness.
This	 is	 a	 beautiful	 prayer,	 the	 most	 beautiful	 prayer.	 But	 five	 thousand	 years
have	passed.	I	feel	that	now	it	needs	a	little	improvement.
I	 would	 not	 say	 'Lead	me	 from	 darkness	 to	 light,'	 because	 darkness	 does	 not
exist.	I	would	say	'Lead	me	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
from	 light	 to	 more	 light.'	 I	 would	 not	 say,	 'Lead	 me	 from	 untruth	 to	 truth,
because	untruth	does	not	exist;	I	would	say	'Lead	me	from	truth	to	more	truth.'	I
would	not	say	'Lead	me	from	death	to	deathlessness,'
because	death	does	not	exist:	I	would	say	'Lead	me	from	deathlessness	to	more
deathlessness,	 from	 life	 to	 more	 abundant	 life,	 from	 perfection	 to	 more
perfection'	...	if	that	is	possible,	because	ordinarily	we	think	perfection	means	the
end,	 but	 I	 don't	 think	 it	 is	 so.	 Perfection	 can	 become	more	 perfect;	 perfection
goes	on	becoming	more	 and	more	perfect.	At	 each	 stage	 it	 is	 perfect,	 but	 still
that	perfection	is	not	a	closedness,	it	is	open.	It	can	always	become	richer,	it	can
always	 become	more	 colourful,	with	 new	 songs,	with	 a	 new	 dance,	with	 new
celebrations.	There	is	no	end	to	evolution.
That	is	the	meaning	of	your	name:	a	pilgrim	of	bliss.	And	don't	let	it	remain	just
a	name,	let	it	become	a	reality.	It	can	become	a	reality.	All	that	is	needed	is	just	a
little	conscious	effort.
We	 go	 on	 living	 mechanically,	 repeating	 the	 same	 stupidity	 again	 and	 again.
Man	seems	to	be	the	only	animal	who	does	not	learn	from	experience	at	all.	This
is	my	observation.	Even	donkeys	learn.
In	Arabic	they	have	a	proverb	that	even	a	donkey	will	not	fall	in	the	same	ditch
again...	but	man	can	do	that	miracle!	He	can	fall	in	the	same	ditch	thousands	of
times	what	to	say	of	twice	or	thrice?	As	many	times	as	he	passes	by	the	side	of
the	ditch	he	will	fall	in'	He	will	say	to	himself,	 'Let	us	try	once	more	--	maybe
things	have	changed,	maybe	it	is	not	the	same	ditch,	and	certainly	I	am	no	more
the	 same	person.	So	much	has	 changed,	 and	 that	 time	 it	was	 evening	 and	 this
time	it	is	morning.	And	what	is	wrong	in	it?	--	one	more	try...'
In	one	of	the	ancient	scriptures	of	India,	MAHABHARATA,	there	is	a	story.	The
story	 is	 centred	around	 the	 fight	between	Pandavas	and	Kauravas	 --	 they	were
cousin-brothers	--	and	the	fight	was	for	the	kingdom.
The	Pandavas	were	the	rightful,	legal	rulers	--	the	kingdom	should	have	gone	to
them,	but	the	Kauravas	were	very	deceptive	and	cunning	people.	They	arranged
a	gambling	game	and	provoked	the	Pandavas	to	put	everything	at	stake	--	even
the	kingdom.	The	game	was	preplanned,	it	was	a	fraud.	Everything	was	settled
beforehand:	 the	 Pandavas	were	 going	 to	 lose.	The	 play	was	 not	 fair,	 and	 they
lost.	 The	 condition	 was	 that	 for	 twelve	 years	 they	 would	 have	 to	 go	 into	 the
forest,	so	that	they	wouldn't	create	any	trouble	for	the	Kauravas.	So	the	Pandavas
moved	 to	 the	 forest.	They	 lost	everything,	 they	became	almost	beggars	 --	 they
moved	to	the	forest.
One	day	roaming	in	the	forest	they	lost	their	way.	They	were	thirsty;	there	were
five	brothers	so	the	youngest	went	to	search	for	water.	He	found	a	beautiful	lake,
but	as	he	was	going	to	fill	his	pot	a	voice	from	a	tree	--	just	a	voice,	nobody	was
there	--	shouted	'Stop!	Before	you	take	the	water	of	the	lake	--	I	am	the	owner,	I
am	a	ghost	--	before	you	take	the	water	you	have	to	answer	those	five	questions,
if	I	am	satisfied,	you	will	be	allowed	to	take	the	water.
(one	line	missing)	you	will	have	to	go	without	water.	And	if	you	try	to	fill	your
pot	without	my	permission	you	will	fall	dead	here,	now.'
He	 tried	 to	answer	but	he	could	not.	The	 first	question	was:	 'What	 is	 the	most
strange	thing	about	man?
Because	he	could	not	answer	 to	 the	ghost's	 satisfaction	and	still	he	 tried	 to	 fill
the	 pot,	 he	 fell	 dead	 then	 and	 there.	By	 and	by	 the	 other	 three	 brothers	 came.
Finally	Yudishthira,	the	oldest	brother,	came,	and	he	saw	his	four	brothers	lying
dead.	 The	 first	 question,	 the	 same	 question,	 was	 repeated:	 What	 is	 the	 most
strange	thing	about	man?
Yudishthira	said,	'The	most	strange	thing	about	man	is	that	he	never	learns	from
his	experience.'	The	ghost	said,	'There	is	no	need	to	ask	the	other	four	questions	-
-	I	am	satisfied.	You	are	a	REAL	man	of	observation.	You	will	be	able	to	answer
my	other	questions	too.	You	can	fill	your	pot...	And	I	am	so	pleased,	because	for
millions	 of	 years	 I	 have	 been	 here,	 waiting,	 for	 a	 man	 who	 can	 satisfy	 my
question,	 because	 this	 is	 the	 curse	 upon	 me:	 If	 I	 can	 be	 satisfied,	 I	 will	 be
released	from	my	bondage.	I	am	released	from	my	bondage	today.	And	I	am	so
happy	with	you	that	I	will	make	all	your	four	brothers	alive	again.'
This	is	certainly	the	most	important	observation	about	man,	that	he	never	learns
from	his	experience.	He	goes	on	in	a	vicious	circle;	he	functions	like	a	machine.
To	 be	 on	 the	 path	 of	 bliss	 all	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 to	 learn	 from	your	 experience.
Don't	repeat	the	same	stupid	things	--	the	same	anger,	the	greed,	the	jealousy,	the
possessiveness.	Don't	repeat	them.	You	have	repeated	them	enough	and	you	have
burned	your	hands	enough.	It	is	time	to	be	aware,	to	be	watchful,	to	be	alert,	and
not	to	fall	into	the	old	traps	again	and	again.
As	you	become	capable	of	watchfulness,	you	become	more	and	more	capable	of
being	free	of	all	 those	old	 traps.	A	moment	comes	when	one	 is	absolutely	free
from	 all	 traps	 and	 imprisonments	 --	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 of	 bliss.	 Bliss	 starts
showering	 like	 flowers	 from	 the	 sky,	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 showering.	 One's	 life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
becomes	a	blessing	to	oneself	and	a	blessing	to	others	too.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007105
ShortTitle:	GWIND10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	 can	 come	 to	 truth	 only	 through	 meditation.	 Truth	 is	 not	 something	 that
mind	can	know.	Mind	can	theorise	about	it,	but	'about'	means	around	--	and	mind
goes	about	and	about,	around	and	around.	It	moves	in	a	circle,	it	never	reaches
the	 centre.	 Its	 very	 nature	 is	 not	 to	 reach	 to	 the	 centre,	 it	 exists	 for	 the
circumference.
Mind	 is	 needed	 only	 to	 relate	 with	 others.	 It	 is	 a	 method	 of	 communication.
Truth	 is	 your	 very	 being.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 relating	 to	 it.	 It	 happens	 only
when	 you	 fall	 into	 deep	 silence,	 when	 you	 forget	 the	 whole	 world,	 when	 the
other	 is	 completely	 forgotten	 as	 if	 the	 other	 does	 not	 exist	 at	 all.	 In	 those
moments	of	solitude	and	aloneness	truth	is	revealed.	It	is	not	a	conclusion	of	the
mind	but	a	revelation	of	no-mind.
Meditation	 simply	 means	 turning	 in.	 Mind	 is	 always	 turning	 out,	 mind	 is
basically	extroversion.	It	has	 its	utility	--	 I	am	not	against	utilising	it,	but	I	am
certainly	 against	 being	 utilised	 by	 it.	Use	 it	 as	 a	 servant,	 use	 it	 as	 a	 beautiful
mechanism,	but	don't	 let	 it	 become	your	master.	 It	 is	 a	good	 slave,	 take	 every
care	of	it,	but	don't	allow	it	to	enslave	you.
Remember	that	the	real	master	is	not	on	the	circumference,	the	real	master	is	at
the	centre.	And	at	the	centre	there	is	only	consciousness:	no	thoughts,	no	desires,
no	 imagination.	All	 the	 faculties	of	 the	mind	stop	 functioning.	You	are	 simply
alert,	 aware,	watchful,	 you	 simply	are.	 In	 that	 state	 you	 are	 truth.	 That	 is	 the
meaning	of	Verity	--	it	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names:	the	state	of	being	true.
And	once	it	is	experienced	it	starts	changing	your	whole	life	style.	If	you	know
your	truth	you	cannot	be	untrue	in	any	way.	It	becomes	impossible.	Even	to	be
untrue	to	others	becomes	impossible.
The	joy	of	being	truthful	is	such	that	who	would	like	to	fall	into	the	darkness	of
being	 untrue?	 The	 simplicity	 of	 being	 truthful	 is	 such	 that	who	would	 like	 to
create	unnecessary	complexities,	complications,	by	being	untruthful?
One	 lie	brings	 in	 its	wake	a	 thousand	and	one	other	 lies,	because	you	have	 to
defend	it,	you	have	to	support	it	--	and	it	cannot	be	defended	by	truth,	it	can	only
be	defended	by	other	lies.	And	every	other	lie	will	need	in	its	own	turn	more	lies.
A	single	lie,	and	your	whole	life	starts	becoming	untruthful,	inauthentic.
Truth	needs	no	defence.	It	is	very	simple,	it	is	simply	so.	And	the	man	who	lives
in	truth	need	not	bother	what	he	has	said,	what	he	has	done.	We	need	not	go	on
remembering	all	that	he	has	said	and	all	that	he	has	done.	The	lying	person	has
to	 be	 continuously	 calculating,	 watching.	 he	 may	 say	 something;	 which	 goes
against	 something	 else	which	 he	 said	 before,	 he	may	 do	 something,	 that	may
undo	 something	 else.	His	 life	 becomes	more	 and	more	 complicated,	more	 and
more	 entangled.	 It	 becomes	 a	 riddle,	 it	 becomes	 a	 problem;	 he	 becomes	 a
problem	to	himself	and	to	others.	And	a	problematic	life	cannot	know	what	bliss
is.
Bliss	is	known	only	by	the	simple,	the	innocent.	But	the	way	to	find	it	is	to	put
the	mind	aside	and	 to	go	 in	a	 state	of	no-mind.	Slowly	slowly	a	 few	glimpses
will	arise,	and	then	those	gaps	start	becoming	bigger,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
then	 those	 beautiful	 intervals	 become	 vaster.	 And	 then	 sooner	 or	 later	 such	 a
state	arises	that	even	if	you	are	in	the	marketplace	doing	the	ordinary	things	of
life	which	 are	 needed,	 your	 silence	 continues	 like	 an	 undercurrent;	 it	 goes	 on
flowing.	 You	 can	 hear	 its	 melody,	 you	 can	 feel	 its	 beauty,	 you	 can	 taste	 its
sweetness.
Truth	brings	many	gifts,	but	one	has	to	open	the	door	of	meditation.	Nobody	can
give	 you	 the	 truth;	 truth	 is	 already	 given	 to	 you	 from	 god	 himself.	 It	 is	 not
something	 that	has	 to	be	 found	anywhere	else;	 it	 is	already	 the	case,	 it	 is	your
suchness,	verity!	You	just	have	to	take	a	few	steps	inwards...
Sannyas	 simply	means	 this:	 a	 decision	 to	 find	 one's	 truth,	 a	 commitment	 that
'From	this	moment	my	life	will	be	devoted	to	finding	mY	truth.'
And	remember:	the	truth	of	Buddha,	the	truth	of	Jesus	or	the	truth	of	Zarathustra
cannot	 be	 your	 truth.	 If	 you	 repeat	 Jesus	 or	Buddha	 you	will	 be	 living	 in	 the
mind.	And	when	 you	 put	 the	mind	 aside,	 naturally	 you	 put	 your	 Christianity,
your	 Hinduism,	 your	Mohammedanism	 aside	 because	 they	 are	 all	 part	 of	 the
mind.
The	moment	you	put	the	mind	aside	you	have	put	the	whole	of	history	aside,	the
whole	world	aside.	Then	you	are	moving	into	your	own	being	with	no	history,	no
past,	with	no	society,	as	if	you	are	alone	on	the	earth,	as	if	you	are	the	first	being
on	the	earth,	in	existence.
Once	 this	 decision	 becomes	 a	 commitment...	 That's	 why	 I	 insist	 on	 sannyas,
otherwise	people	can	simply	listen	to	me	and	they	can	meditate	and	they	can	go
on	living	ordinarily	--	there	is	no	need	to	become	sannyasins.	And	many	people
think	 'What	 is	 the	 need	 of	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin?	We	 can	 meditate,	 we	 can
listen,	we	can	 try	 to	understand	what	 is	happening,	we	can	go	 through	 therapy
groups...'
But	 there	 is	 a	 very	 fundamental	 reason;	 the	 reason	 is:	 it	 is	 a	 deliberate
commitment,	a	conscious	decision,	so	from	this	moment	it	becomes	your	focus
of	 life.	You	have	 to	put	all	 that	 is	unessential	aside,	and	you	have	 to	put	more
and	more	energy	into	the	inward	journey.
The	truth	is	not	very	far.	It	needs	only	one	step,	hence	it	is	better	not	to	call	it	a
step:	it	is	a	quantum	leap,	a	jump	from	mind	to	no-mind.
Meditation	 brings	many	 fruits.	 It	 brings	 truth,	 it	 brings	 freedom	 too;	 it	 brings
bliss,	 it	brings	awareness,	 it	brings	 immortality	 too.	 In	fact	 it	simply	opens	 the
doors	 of	 all	 the	mysteries	 of	 life.	 It	 is	 the	 golden	 key,	 the	master	 key:	with	 a
single	key	you	can	unlock	everything.
Without	meditation	nobody	can	live	in	freedom.	One	can	be	politically	free,	but
that	is	not	true	freedom.
If	 there	 are	many	desires	 inside	you,	 then	 those	desires	 function	 like	 chains	 --
invisible	 chains	 of	 course,	 but	 because	 they	 are	 invisible	 they	 are	 more
dangerous.	 Iron	 chains	 are	 not	 so	 dangerous	 because	 you	 can	 see	 them,	 and
because	you	can	see	them	they	can	be	broken.	The	chains	created	by	desires	are
invisible,	and	because	you	cannot	see	them	you	go	on	thinking	you	are	free.	But
a	man	living	in	desires	is	not	a	free	man,	he	is	living	in	constant	bondage.	He	is
always	desiring	more.	His	greed	is	his	imprisonment:	he	will	live	like	a	prisoner
and	die	like	a	prisoner.
And	desires	bring	other	problems	too:	jealousy	will	be	there,	possessiveness	will
be	there,	clinging	will	be	there,	fear	will	be	there,	competition,	comparison,	and
between	all	these	boundaries	you	cannot	be	free.
Unless	you	are	free	of	all	these	you	are	not	free.
The	moment	desires	disappear	one	knows	freedom	for	the	first	time.	Then	one	is
untethered,	 then	 one	 lives	 moment	 to	 moment,	 not	 asking	 for	 more;	 on	 the
contrary,	enjoying	that	which	is	available.
There	are	only	two	kinds	of	people	in	the	world.	There	are	the	people	who	are
always	asking	 for	more	and	never	enjoying	 that	which	 is	 available.	When	 that
which	they	are	asking	for	becomes	available	they	will	still	be	asking	for	more;
they	are	not	going	to	enjoy	it	either.	They	will	be	postponing	their	enjoyment	for
their	whole	life.	Their	life	is	nothing	but	a	long,	long	postponement;	it	is	always
tomorrow.	Today	they	have	to	work,	today	they	have	to	earn,	tomorrow	they	will
relax	and	enjoy.	But	the	tomorrow	never	comes,	it	is	always	today.	Hence	they
live	without	knowing	what	life	is.
The	second	category	of	people	is	of	those	who	enjoy	that	which	they	have,	not
bothering	about	more.
And	 the	miracle	 is	 that	 every	 day	 they	 have	more	 and	more	 to	 enjoy,	 for	 two
reasons.	Their	capacity	to	enjoy	increases.	They	are	constantly	practising	it,	each
moment	they	are	enjoying.	They	become	more	skilful,	they	become	connoisseurs
of	joy,	they	become	very	very	sensitive	about	small	nuances	of	pleasure.
All	 their	 senses	become	very	 alive,	 they	become	 tremendously	 intelligent,	 and
out	of	this	intelligence,	awareness,	sensitivity,	the	next	moment	will	be	born.	Of
course	they	will	be	able	to	enjoy	the	next	moment	more	than	they	have	enjoyed
this	moment.	 Their	 life	 will	 be	 a	 constant	 process	 of	 deepening;	 they	will	 be
moving	into	depth.
The	 first	category	of	people	 live	horizontally.	They	don't	know	anything	about
depth;	they	have	never	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
known	anything	of	intensity,	of	passion,	of	totality.	They	are	always	running	and
rushing.	They	are	 in	 such	a	hurry,	 it	 is	 impossible	 for	 them	 to	enjoy	anything.
They	 are	 always	 running	 and	 rushing.	 They	 go	 on	 missing	 that	 which	 is
surrounding	them.
The	person	who	lives	in	the	moment	lives	a	vertical	life.	It	is	a	totally	different
dimension;	he	grows	in	depth.	And	the	deeper	you	go,	the	higher	you	rise.	It	is
just	like	a	tree:	the	roots	go	deep	in	the	ground	and	the	tree	goes	high	in	the	sky;
the	deeper	 the	 roots,	 the	higher	 the	 tree.	 It	 is	 always	proportionate:	with	 small
roots	a	tree	cannot	rise	high	in	the	sky	--	it	will	fall.	If	the	tree	wants	to	touch	the
stars	then	it	will	have	to	reach	the	very	hell	by	its	roots.
Hence	 a	 real	 man	 lives	 in	 such	 totality	 that	 he	 reaches	 the	 very	 depths,	 the
rockbottom	 of	 his	 being.	 And	 he	 starts	 touching	 the	 very	 stars,	 the	 ultimate
heights	and	peaks	of	bliss.
This	is	freedom	--	freedom	to	be,	and	freedom	to	be	total	and	whole.	Sannyasins
have	to	belong	to	the	second	category.
Meditation	brings	all	that	is	valuable	in	life:	truth,	freedom,	celebration.	It	gives
your	heart	a	dance,	it	makes	your	being	full	of	songs;	one	loses	all	seriousness.
Seriousness	 is	 pathological.	 It	 is	 an	 ill	 state	 of	 affairs,	 it	 is	 not	 healthy.	 The
meditator	 takes	 life	 playfully.	 For	 him	 the	 whole	 existence	 is	 just	 a	 beautiful
dream	and	life	is	acting:	do	it	with	totality,	but	without	any	seriousness.	And	if
you	are	not	serious	then	there	is	never	any	frustration.	If	you	succeed,	good;	if
you	 fail,	 good.	Neither	 failure	 brings	misery	 nor	 success	 brings	 euphoria;	 one
takes	both	things	with	deep	equanimity.	One	remains	undisturbed	by	success	or
failure;	one	remains	absolutely	unmoved,	centered,	grounded.
Meditation	 makes	 you	 the	 center	 of	 the	 cyclone.	 Life	 comes	 and	 goes	 --	 the
meditator	remains	unaffected,	even	death	is	just	a	drama.	Just	as	he	enjoys	life,
he	enjoys	death;	he	can	laugh	in	life,	he	can	laugh	in	death.
Meditation	 is	 the	 greatest	miracle	 there	 is.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest	 gift	 that	 has	 been
given	 by	 the	 awakened	 ones	 to	 humanity.	 Science	 has	 given	many	 things,	 but
nothing	compared	to	meditation;	and	one	cannot	conceive	that	science	will	ever
be	 able	 to	 give	 anything	 comparable	 to	meditation.	Up	 to	 now	meditation	 has
been	 the	 greatest	 gift	 to	 humanity,	 and	 it	 is	 going	 to	 remain	 the	 greatest	 gift
forever.	That	can	be	safely	predicted	for	the	simple	reason	that	science	goes	on
studying	 the	objective	world;	meditation	gives	 you	mastery	of	 your	 subjective
existence,	your	inner	world	--	and	the	inner	is	always	higher	than	the	outer.
Science	 cannot	 be	 greater	 than	 the	 scientist,	 obviously:	 the	 object	 cannot	 be
higher,	more	valuable	than	the	observer.
Albert	Einstein	has	given	many	great	things,	but	nothing	is	more	valuable	than
Albert	Einstein	himself
--	and	he	remained	unaware	of	himself.	He	became	aware	of	this	fact,	but	very
late.	Just	before	he	dies	he	confesses	 to	a	 friend	"Next	 time,	 if	 I	come	back	 to
life,	I	would	rather	be	a	plumber	than	a	physicist.	I	would	like	to	live	a	simple
life."	But	he	did	not	know	that	plumbers	are	not	living	simple	lives	either!	Life
without	 meditation	 --	 whether	 you	 are	 a	 plumber	 or	 a	 physicist	 makes	 no
difference.	But	one	thing	is	certain,	that	he	became	aware	of	the	fact	that	he	had
missed	something.
This	 is	 the	 right	 time	 for	 you,	 this	 is	 the	 age	 that	 one	 should	 start	 getting
involved	in	the	inner.	Then	there	is	time	and	there	is	space	and	there	is	energy	to
do	 something.	 So	 feel	 blessed	 that	 at	 the	 right	 time	 you	 are	 becoming	 a
sannyasin.	You	need	not	to	die	feeling	that	you	have	missed.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007115
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ShortTitle:	GWIND11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
There	 is	 a	 great	 difference	 between	 a	 student	 and	 a	 disciple.	 The	 student
communicates	 with	 the	 teacher	 through	 the	 mind.	 His	 relationship	 is	 that	 of
communication,	 head	 to	 head,	 intellect	 to	 intellect.	 He	 knows	 nothing	 of	 the
master,	 he	 can	 know	 only	 about	 the	 teacher.	 The	 teacher	 is	 one	 who	 teaches
something;	the	master	is	one	who	transmits	something,	he	doesn't	teach.	He	has
no	doctrine	to	teach	but	a	life	to	give,	a	bliss	to	share,	a	truth	to	transpire.	It	is	a
totally	 different	 kind	 of	 relationship:	 it	 is	 from	 heart	 to	 heart,	 it	 is	 a	 love
relationship.
The	 disciple	 discovers	 the	master	 because	 the	 disciple	 approaches	 through	 the
heart.	 The	 whole	 gestalt	 is	 different.	 To	 approach	 through	 the	 head	 is	 very
superficial.	One	 can	 learn	many	 things	 through	 the	 head	 too,	 one	 can	 become
very	knowledgeable	but	one	cannot	know	oneself.	One	can	know	everything	else
except	oneself	--	and	that	 is	 the	very	foundation	of	 true	knowledge.	And	if	 the
foundation	is	missing	you	are	making	a	house	in	the	sand,	is	is	going	to	collapse.
Not	 only	 is	 it	 going	 to	 collapse,	 it	 will	 crush	 you	 too,	 because	 you	will	 start
living	in	it.
The	scholar	lives	in	the	house	of	knowledge	which	can	crumble	any	moment	--	it
has	no	foundation.	The	disciple	 is	not	a	scholar.	The	student,	when	successful,
becomes	a	scholar.	The	disciple,	when	successful,	becomes	a	devotee.	His	love
changes	 its	 quality,	 it	 becomes	more	 prayerlike,	 it	 becomes	more	 unearthly,	 it
becomes	absolutely	pure	and	innocent.	It	asks	nothing.
Love	 is	 the	 door	 from	where	 the	 disciple	 enters	 and	 discovers	 the	master.	 To
discover	 the	 master	 is	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 blessings	 in	 life,	 because	 without
discovering	 the	master	 it	 is	next	 to	 impossible	 to	attain	 to	 truth.	You	will	need
somebody	who	has	already	attained	to	trigger	the	process	in	you,	to	function	as	a
catalytic	agent.	But	it	needs	great	courage	to	be	a	disciple.
It	 needs	 no	 courage	 to	 be	 a	 student.	 All	 that	 it	 needs	 is	 greeds	 greed	 for
knowledge,	 information.	 It	 is	 very	 ego-fulfilling:	 the	 more	 knowledge	 you
accumulate,	the	more	your	ego	feels	decorated,	crowned;it	has	many	degrees	and
gold	medals	and	certificates.
The	disciple	has	to	risk	his	ego.	The	very	thing	that	is	enhanced	by	knowledge
has	 to	 be	 dropped	 and	 surrendered.	 It	 is	 almost	 like	 committing	 hara-kiri,
committing	suicide.	In	a	sense	it	is	suicide.	In	a	sense	it	is	the	beginning	of	the
real	 life.	 The	 unreal	 life	 disappears	 and	 the	 real	 life	 begins.	The	 unreal	 life	 is
lived	 around	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 ego;	 and	 the	 real	 life	 needs	 no	 ego,	 being	 is
enough.
To	be	a	disciple	means	 to	surrender	your	ego.	Sannyas	 is	surrender,	sannyas	 is
love.	Sannyas	is	a	device	to	attain	to	disciplehood,	and	ultimately	to	the	purest
form	of	 love,	devotion,	prayer.	 It	 is	 only	 through	 this	 that	one	becomes	aware
that	existence	is	full	of	godliness.
The	 student	 can	 learn	much	 about	 god	 but	 he	 knows	 nothing.	Words,	 cliches,
theories	 ...	many	he	accumulates,	but	all	 is	 sheer	 junk,	an	unnecessary	burden.
He	is	like	a	donkey	carrying	Encyclopaedia	Brittanica.
The	 disciple	 is	 absolutely	 unburdened.	 He	 grows	 wings.	 He	 loses	 the	 grip	 of
greed,	 the	 clinging	 to	 any	 kind	 of	 accumulation	 --	 whether	 it	 is	 of	 money	 or
knowledge.	 He	 simply	 loses	 all	 grip	 on	 anything	 whatsoever.	 He	 lives	 in	 an
unclinging	 way,	 unattached.	 But	 in	 that	 state	 of	 unattachment,	 unclinging,
tremendous	 mysteries	 open	 their	 doors,	 great	 flowers	 bloom.	 The	 imprisoned
splendour	is	released.
Daniel	is	the	name	of	an	ancient	Old	Testament	prophet	who	was	thrown	into	a
den	of	lions	because	he	refused	to	drop	his	commitment	towards	his	faith.
The	story	is	beautiful	--	whether	it	happened	or	not	is	not	the	point:	he	came	out
unharmed,	 the	 lions	 did	 not	 harm	 him	 at	 all.	 The	 story	 is	 beautiful	 because	 it
says	two	things.
One	 is	 that	whenever	 there	 is	 a	man	who	devotes	his	 life	 to	a	certain	attitude,
approach,	 who	 endeavours	 to	 discover	 truth,	 society	 immediately	 becomes
inimical	 towards	 him.	 It	 starts	 taking	 revenge.	 It	 cannot	 forgive	 him	 because
society	lives	on	lies	--	and	the	man	committed	to	truth	becomes	a	danger	to	all
the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
vested	interests	he	has	to	be	killed.
Man	has	been	doing	that	all	along.	He	has	not	changed	a	little	bit,	even	today	he
is	 the	 same.	 Much	 progress	 has	 happened	 in	 other	 fields	 --	 technologically,
scientifically	man	is	far	advanced	today,	but	psychologically	he	is	as	primitive	as
ever.	He	still	behaves	with	Daniel	in	the	same	old	way.
The	second	point	in	the	story	is	that	even	wild	lions	are	far	more	intelligent	than
man,	 far	 more	 compassionate	 and	 loving	 than	man,	 far	 more	 human	 than	 so-
called	human	beings.	They	could	not	harm	Daniel;	they	could	see	that	this	man
was	worth	saving.
Such	stories	have	existed	in	all	mythologies.	A	mad	elephant	was	set	loose	to	kill
Buddha.	He	had	killed	many	people.	He	was	so	mad	 that	he	had	 to	be	kept	 in
chains	continuously,	but	his	chains	were	removed	and	he	was	left	 loose.	When
he	came	to	Buddha	he	looked	at	Buddha,	bowed	down	and	touched	his	feet!	Sat
there	 for	 half	 an	 hour!	 The	 people	 who	 left	 him	 were	 puzzled	 --	 what	 had
happened?	What	had	gone	wrong?
The	story	is	the	same:	even	a	mad	elephant	is	not	as	mad	as	the	so-called	sane
human	 beings.	 These	may	 not	 be	 historical	 facts.	 I	 don't	 insist	 on	 their	 being
historical.	 They	 are	 far	 more	 valuable	 than	 historical	 facts,	 they	 are	 eternal
truths.	They	contain	something	immensely	significant.	They	are	not	just	facts	but
truths.
Facts	are	momentary,	facts	are	events	in	time.	Truths	are	not	events	in	time,	they
have	something	eternal	about	them.	So	these	are	symbolic	stories.
This	is	going	to	happen	to	my	disciples	too	--	 it	has	already	started	happening.
They	 will	 be	 tortured	 in	 every	 possible	 way,	 they	 will	 be	 harrassed	 in	 every
possible	way.	But	one	thing	is	beautiful	about	this	whole	thing,	that	the	more	you
are	harassed	for	truth,	the	deeper	becomes	your	love	for	it.	You	start	becoming
more	crystallised,	you	start	becoming	a	soul,	you	start	having	a	centre.	The	more
you	 are	 tortured,	 harassed,	 the	more	you	become	committed	 to	 your	 truth,	 the
more	 you	 become	 rooted	 in	 it,	 the	 more	 certain	 you	 become	 of	 its	 validity,
because	if	 it	were	not	true	then	people	would	not	bother	about	you	at	all.	If	so
many	people	are	worried	and	are	unable	to	tolerate	you	it	simply	shows	that	you
have	stumbled	upon	something	significant.
People	are	only	afraid	of	truth	and	of	nothing	else.
The	 last	 words	 of	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha	 to	 his	 disciples	 were	 'Be	 a	 lamp	 unto
yourself.'	 This	 is	 the	 most	 pregnant	 message	 ever.	 The	 whole	 philosophy	 of
meditation	is	contained	in	it.
Meditation	means	that	no	outer	light	is	going	to	help,	no	outer	treasure	is	going
to	make	you	rich,	no	outer	conquest	is	going	to	make	you	a	real	conqueror.	The
real	treasure	is	within	you	and	the	real	conquest	has	to	be	made	there.	It	is	such	a
ridiculous	 thing	 that	we	go	on	searching	for	something	which	we	have	already
got,	but	we	never	look	within.	We	look	everywhere	else	we	can	go	to	the	very
corners	of	 the	earth	or	even	to	 the	moon	in	search	of	some	illusory	pleasure	--
just	one	territory	we	never	enter,	and	that	is	our	own	being.
Meditation	 is	 a	 simple	 technique	 of	 entering	 it.	Meditation	 means	 awareness,
alertness,	watchfulness,	witnessing.	Witness	your	actions,	witness	your	thoughts
witness	your	feelings	so	that	slowly	slow	you	can	see	you	are	neither	the	body
nor	the	mind	nor	heart	--	that	you	are	the	witness	of	it	all.
The	 moment	 you	 know	 that	 you	 are	 only	 a	 witness,	 a	 pure	 mirror	 reflecting
everything,	and	you	are	not	identified	with	any	reflection,	suddenly	you	discover
your	 inner	 light.	 It	 is	 already	 there,	 but	we	have	 to	 shift	 our	 consciousness.	A
one-hundred-and-eighty	 degree	 turn	 is	 needed,	 and	 it	 happens	 only	 by
witnessing,	 there	 is	 no	 other	method.	When	 you	 are	witnessing,	 anything	 one
thing	 becomes	 clear,	 that	 you	 are	 not	 the	 thing	 that	 you	 are	 witnessing,
obviously;	you	are	the	witness	of	it.
Go	on,	deeper	and	deeper.	When	nothing	is	left	to	witness,	you	have	witnessed
all	objects	 that	you	can	witness	and	you	have	rejected	them	knowing	 'I	am	not
that,'	when	everything	is	eliminated,	only	you	are	left
--	just	the	mirror	and	nothing	else;	suddenly	the	shift:	consciousness	turns	upon
itself.
That	moment	of	 turning	 in	 is	 the	greatest	moment	 in	 life.	 In	 that	very	moment
you	know	who	you	are	and	you	know	what	god	is,	and	you	know	what	bliss	is,
you	know	what	truth	is,	freedom	is,	what	eternity	is.
All	that	is	worth	knowing	is	known	--	immediately,	instantly.	And	then	you	can
go	on	 living	 in	 the	world	but	you	will	be	 living	with	a	 totally	different	centre,
with	a	totally	different	perspective:	you	will	be	in	the	world	but	absolutely	out	of
it.
That's	the	way	of	sannyas:	to	be	in	the	world	and	absolutely	out	of	it.
Every	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	song	of	meditation.	I	insist	on	the	fact	that	you
have	 to	 become	 a	 song,	 a	 celebration,	 because	 for	 centuries	 meditation	 has
become	 associated	 with	 seriousness.	 That	 has	 proved	 a	 calamity,	 the	 greatest
disaster;	 it	 has	 colored	 the	 whole	 world	 of	 meditation	 in	 a	 wrong	 way.	 And
because	of	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
this	 wrong	 association	 only	 sad	 and	 pathological	 people	 become	 interested	 in
meditation.
People	think	that	religion	is	for	those	who	are	already	dead	or	almost	dead.	It	is
for	 old	 people,	 people	who	 are	 in	 despair,	 people	who	 have	 failed	 in	 life	 and
need	some	kind	of	consolation,	people	who	could	not	make	it.	Karl	Marx	says,
religion	is	the	opium	of	the	people.	It	is	for	failures	who	need	some	kind	of	drug
to	keep	them	away	from	their	failures	and	the	pain	of	their	failures	so	that	they
can	forget	their	miseries.
Karl	Marx	is	certainly	right	about	this	wrong	kind	of	religion,	but	he	is	not	right
about	the	religion	I	am	talking	about.
My	 religion	has	 a	 totally	different	 flavor.	 It	 has	 the	 flavor	of	 joy,	of	dance,	 of
song,	 of	 celebration.	 It	 has	 the	 color	 of	 spring.	 In	 the	East	 orange	 symbolizes
spring.	In	spring,	when	all	the	flowers	bloom,	the	whole	forest	becomes	orange.
They	all	become	sannyasins.	They	become	afire	with	color.
It	is	not	for	dead	people,	it	is	for	the	most	fresh	young	people.	It	is	for	those	who
are	totally	alive	and	want	to	be	more	alive.
My	sannyasins	have	to	change	the	very	definition	of	religion	in	the	world.	It	is	a
great	 task,	 a	 great	 challenge,	 but	 now	 the	 time	 has	 come	 for	 it	 to	 be	 done,
otherwise	 religion	will	 die.	That	 sad	 and	 serious	 kind	of	 religion	has	 no	more
future.
Now	we	need	a	laughing	religion,	a	dancing	religion,	a	religion	which	loves	life,
which	loves	love;	a	religion	which	rejoices	in	small	things.	A	religion	which	is
not	against	life	but	totally	for	it.
Meditation	 is	 the	 ultimate	 magic.	 It	 changes	 dust	 into	 gold;	 it	 transforms	 the
lowest	 forms	of	 energies	 into	 the	highest	 form	of	 energies.	 It	 is	 an	 alchemical
process	of	transformation.
Man	comes	with	all	the	potential	of	being	a	god	and	remains	only	an	animal	for
the	 simple	 reason	 that	 he	 remains	 confined	 to	 raw	 energies.	He	 never	 tries	 to
change	those	raw	energies	into	some	refined	form.
They	 can	 be	 changed:	 anger	 can	 become	 compassion	 --	 it	 just	 has	 to	 pass
through	 meditation;	 sex	 can	 become	 samadhi	 --	 it	 just	 has	 to	 pass	 through
meditation,	greed	can	become	sharing,	 lust	can	become	 love,	 love	can	become
prayer.	And	we	live	at	the	lowest	rung	of	the	ladder,	we	live	where	we	are	born.
We	never	think	of	ourselves	as	potential	beings,	we	take	life	for	granted,	as	if	we
are	 already	born	 entire,	 complete,	 perfect.	That's	 not	 so.	We	are	born	with	 the
capacity	to	be	perfect,	we	are	born	with	all	the	potential	to	reach	to	the	highest
peak.	But	it	is	only	a	potential	--	it	has	to	be	made	actual.	And	to	make	it	actual
you	will	need	a	certain	methodology.
It	is	just	as	gold	is	found	in	the	mines	and	then	it	goes	through	many	processes
of	refinement.	It	is	just	as	diamonds	are	to	be	found	in	the	mines,	but	then	they
are	 just	 stones.	Only	 jewellers	 can	 recognise	 them	ordinary	people	will	not	be
able	to	recognise	that	they	are	diamonds.
I	 know	 one	 jeweller,	 one	 of	 my	 friends.	 He	 has	 his	 house	 full	 of	 so	 many
diamonds	 that	he	cannot	count	 them,	he	has	 to	weigh	 them.	He	keeps	 them	 in
heaps.	When	he	took	me	to	show	his	collection	I	only	saw	ordinary	stones.	I	said
'What	 are	 you	 talking	 about?	 You	 were	 saying	 that	 you	 have	 thousands	 of
diamonds
--	are	 these	diamonds?'	He	said	 'These	are	diamonds,	but	 they	will	need	much
processing;	then	only	will	you	be	able	to	see	what	they	are.	Right	now,	they	are
just	ordinary	stones,	and	I	purchased	them	for	nothing	because	the	people	who
brought	them	to	me	thought	they	were	just	coloured	stones.'
Man	 also	 is	 a	 rare	 diamond,	 but	 ordinarily	 you	will	 find	 in	 him	 anger,	 greed,
hatred,	lust	--	all	kinds	of	poisons	--	and	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	any	Buddha,
any	Christ	at	all.	You	will	not	be	able	to	see	Krishna	anywhere,	you	will	not	hear
the	flute	of	Krishna	inside	him,	and	you	will	not	see	the	purity	and	the	innocence
of	Buddha.	But	he	contains	the	purity	of	Buddha,	the	innocence	of	Mahavira,	the
rebellion	of	Jesus,	the	song	and	the	dance	of	Krishna,	and	the	infinite	wisdom	of
Lao	Tzu.	He	contains	everything	that	has	ever	happened	to	any	human	being	in
the	world.
But	a	certain	science	is	needed,	and	that's	 the	science	of	meditation.	It	 is	not	a
complicated	science	at	all,	very	simple,	but	sometimes	it	happens	that	we	go	on
missing	 the	simplest	 thing	 in	 life.	We	miss	 the	obvious	because	we	are	always
looking	far	away.	We	are	always	attracted	by	the	distant,	by	the	far	away,	and	the
closest	always	remains	available.	But	because	it	 is	always	available,	who	cares
about	it?
I	was	reading	that	once	a	survey	was	made	in	London	of	how	many	people	had
not	 visited	 the	 Tower	 of	 London.	 It	 was	 a	 surprise,	 a	 great	 surprise	 for	 the
surveyors,	 that	 there	were	 thousands	 of	 people	who	 had	 not	 visited	 the	 tower.
They	 had	 been	 passing	 by	 the	 side	 of	 the	 tower	 for	 their	whole	 life,	 but	 they
were	 thinking	 'Any	day,	any	 time,	we	can	go	and	see	 it.'	And	 there	are	people
who	come	from	the	farthest	corner	of	the	world	to	see	the	Tower	of	London!
In	Agra	there	are	thousands	of	people	who	have	not	visited	the	Taj	Mahal	--	and
they	may	 die	without	 visiting	 it,	 unless	 somebody	 declares	 that	 'Tomorrow	 an
atom	bomb	is	going	to	be	dropped	on	Agra.'	Then	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
they	will	rush	to	see	the	Taj	Mahal	because	that	would	be	the	last	day.	Otherwise
they	will	 go	on	 living,	postponing:	 it	 is	 so	obvious,	 it	 is	 so	 close	by,	 they	can
visit	it	any	time.
Our	own	being	is	even	closer,	and	the	method	of	meditation	is	so	simple	--	that's
why	millions	of	people	miss	it.
Once	 you	 start	 going	 in	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 that	 it	 is	 such	 a	 simple
phenomenon	but	it	has	tremendous	beauty,	the	greatest	joy	possible,	the	greatest
flowering	possible.	How	had	you	missed	it	for	so	long?	You	will	not	be	able	to
explain	to	yourself	why	and	how	you	waited	so	long.	And	it	can	transform	your
whole	being	into	gold.
So	being	a	sannyasin	make	it	a	point...	I	don't	ask	for	any	other	formalities,	the
whole	 emphasis	 is	 on	 meditation.	 Make	 it	 a	 point	 that	 from	 this	 moment
meditation	has	 to	be	your	 focus,	your	whole	 life,	everything	else	 is	 secondary.
Sacrifice	everything	for	meditation	and	you	will	never	repent.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#12
Chapter	title:	None
12	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007125
ShortTitle:	GWIND12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	has	lost	grace,	animals	still	have	it	--	wild	animals,	more	so.	In	a	zoo	they
start	 losing	 grace	 and	 beauty,	 they	 start	 becoming	 perverted.	 The	 association
with	man	is	poisonous.
This	 is	 something	 very	 significant	 to	 understand,	 that	 man	 has	 no	 being	 like
other	animals.	The	dog	has	a	certain	being,	the	wolf	has	a	certain	being;	a	settled
centre	is	there.	The	dog	is	born	as	a	dog	and	will	die	as	a	dog.	He	will	neither
fall	below	it	nor	will	he	rise	above	it.	His	life	is	a	certainty.
Man	has	 no	 certain	 being,	 he	 has	 only	 a	 potential;	 hence	 both	 alternatives	 are
open:	he	can	fall	below	the	animals,	he	can	rise	above	the	gods.	He	can	become
an	Adolf	Hitler,	Genghis	Khan,	Tamerlaine;	he	can	become	a	Gautam	Buddha,	a
Jesus	Christ,	a	Lao	Tzu.
Man	is	a	ladder	--	there	are	many	possibilities	in	him;	hence	it	is	both	a	danger
and	a	dignity,	a	glory	and	an	agony.	It	is	easier	to	fall;	falling	is	always	easier,	no
effort	is	needed	for	it.	To	rise	needs	effort.	The	higher	you	want	to	rise,	the	more
effort	is	needed.	If	you	want	to	reach	the	peaks	of	consciousness	you	will	have	to
risk	all.
One	should	not	take	one's	being	for	granted	because	man	has	no	being	at	all	--
just	a	spectrum	of	possibilities,	the	whole	spectrum.	That	is	the	beauty	of	man,
and	his	misery	too.	He	is	the	only	anxious	animal	in	existence,	the	only	animal
who	 feels	 anguish.	 This	 is	 the	 root	 cause	 of	 his	 anguish:	 he	 is	 always	 at	 a
crossroads;	he	has	to	choose	every	moment	to	be	or	not	to	be,	to	be	this	or	to	be
that.	He	is	torn	apart.
Sannyas	is	a	decision,	a	commitment	towards	rising	to	the	ultimate	peaks.
The	most	divine	duality	in	man	arises	through	meditation.	Meditation	is	the	door
to	the	divine.	Nothing	is	more	godly	than	meditation,	because	in	meditation	you
slip	 out	 of	 the	 mind;	 you	 disappear	 from	 the	 outside,	 you	 exist	 only	 at	 your
innermost	core.	And	your	innermost	core	is	rooted	in	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	as	every	tree	is	rooted	in	the	earth,	every	consciousness	is	rooted	in	god;	god
means	the	ultimate	consciousness.	And	meditation	is	the	bridge	that	takes	you	to
the	 very	 source	 of	 your	 being.	 Once	 you	 have	 tasted	 the	 joy	 of	 being	 at	 the
source,	 then	everything	else	 in	 life	becomes	meaningless.	Then	you	can	go	on
living	the	ordinary	life	but	it	is	all	acting,	it	is	a	beautiful	drama.	Play	it	as	well
as	you	can,	but	you	know	now	that	you	are	not	part	of	it.	It's	just	a	role,	it	is	not
your	 existence.	 You	 can	 have	 all	 kinds	 of	 relationships	 in	 the	 world	 yet	 you
know	the	beauty	of	your	being	alone,	you	know	the	bliss	of	being,	of	being	at	the
centre	in	solitude.
Once	that	window	opens	your	life	is	transformed.	And	that's	the	whole	purpose
of	sannyas:	to	open	that	window	so	that	you	can	really	know	you	are	godly.
Misery	 needs	 no	 intelligence,	 no	 courage,	 no	 rebellion;	 you	 simply	 have	 to
adjust	yourself	to	society	and	you	will	be	miserable,	because	the	whole	society	is
miserable.	 If	 you	 want	 to	 be	 blissful	 you	 have	 to	 rebel	 against	 many	 things
which	create	misery:	you	have	to	be	on	guard	not	to	fall	a	victim	of	all	kinds	of
superstitions	 that	 surround	 everybody.	 They	 are	 ancient,	 very	 ancient,	 and	we
have	accepted	them	almost	as	if	they	are	truths.	They	are	not.	They	are	the	cause
of	our	misery.
But	society	wants	you	to	be	miserable.	This	has	 to	be	very	clearly	understood,
that	the	society	is	interested	in	your	being	miserable.	There	are	reasons	why	the
society	is	interested	in	your	being	miserable:	a	miserable	person	is	manageable;
a	 miserable	 person	 is	 always	 in	 such	 a	 low	 state	 of	 energy	 that	 he	 can	 be
enslaved.	Misery	functions	almost	like	a	spiritual	castration.
Bulls	cannot	be	harnessed	to	bullock	carts;	first	 they	have	to	be	castrated.	And
have	you	seen	the	difference	between	a	bull	and	an	ox?	There	 is	a	 tremendous
difference.	the	bull	has	grace,	beauty,	power,	strength,	and	the	ox	is	just	poor.	He
was	also	born	to	be	a	bull	but	he	has	been	cut	from	his	very	roots,	his	energy	has
been	destroyed.	Now	it	is	possible	to	harness	him	to	a	cart.
If	you	harness	a	bull	to	a	cart	you	will	be	in	danger;	he	will	take	you	anywhere.
You	will	not	be	bale	 to	manage	him;	 it	will	be	 impossible	 to	keep	him	on	 the
road.	And	 if	he	meets	a	beautiful	cow	on	 the	road	he	will	 forget	all	about	you
and	the	cart!	He	is	alive	--	the	ox	is	dead.
And	the	same	has	been	done	to	man.	It	is	a	very	subtle	strategy:	from	the	very
beginning	the	child	is	slowly,	spiritually	castrated,	is	made	spiritually	impotent.
He	is	forced	to	be	obedient	to	all	kinds	of	stupidities.	Things	are	imposed	on	him
and	 he	 is	 helpless;	 he	 depends	 on	 the	 parents.	He	 knows	 that	 he	 cannot	 exist
without	 their	 support	 so	 he	 has	 to	 compromise.	 And	 slowly	 slowly	 he
completely	forgets	that	he	has	compromised	too	much.	By	the	time	he	is	able	to
stand	 on	 his	 own	 feet	 he	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 what	 freedom	 is,	 what
rebellion	is,	what	the	beauty	of	being	intelligent	is	--	he	has	become	a	slave.
Hitherto	this	society	--	and	when	I	say	'this	society'	I	mean	all	the	societies	of	the
world.	I	make	no	distinctions	--	Christians,	Hindus,	Mohammedans,	they	are	all
alike.	 Different	 brands	 of	 castration	 of	 course,	 but	 the	 base	 is	 the	 same:	 they
have	all	done	one	thing,	they	have	destroyed	the	spirit	of	man.
My	effort	here	is	to	make	you	alive	once	more,	to	call	you	forth	from	the	grave.
My	sannyasins	have	to	be	rebellious,	intelligent,	only	then	can	they	be	blissful.
Risk	everything	to	be	blissful,	because	nothing	is	more	precious	than	bliss.	Let
that	be	the	only	goal	in	life;	everything	else	is	secondary,	insignificant.
The	two	qualities	of	being	courageous	and	being	blissful	prepare	the	ground	for
god	to	descend	in	you.
You	have	to	be	courageous	because	god	is	unknown.	And	whatsoever	you	have
heard	about	god,	when	you	really	come	to	know	god	you	will	be	surprised:	all
that	you	heard	about	him	was	sheer	nonsense,	bullshit!
There	 is	 no	 way	 to	 describe	 the	 experience.	 God	 remains	 indefinable,
inexpressible.	 It	 is	 so	 unknown,	 even	 those	who	have	 experienced	him	cannot
relate	their	experience	to	anybody	else;	one	simply	becomes	dumb.
The	English	word	'mystic'	is	very	beautiful.	Its	original	meaning	is:	one	who	has
become	dumb	through	experiencing,	one	who	has	come	across	such	a	truth	that
he	can	only	say	it	is	mysterious,	that	it	is	a	mystery
--	which	is	saying	nothing.
One	needs	to	be	courageous	enough	to	enter	into	the	unknown.	Cowards	live	in
the	known,	courageous	people	explore	unknown.	And	one	needs	 to	be	blissful
for	god	to	enter	into	your	being,	because	unless	you	are	dancing	and	singing	and
celebrating	you	are	not	ready	for	god.	God	is	celebration,	god	is	a	dance,	god	is	a
song.	God	cannot	happen	to	people	who	are	sad	and	serious,	god	cannot	happen
to	miserable	people.
Misery	 makes	 people	 shrink,	 bliss	 makes	 them	 expand,	 bliss	 makes	 them
spacious	 --	 and	 god	 needs	 all	 the	 space,	 only	 then	 can	 that	 ultimate	 sky	 enter
you.	You	have	to	become	almost	as	vast	as	the	sky	--	and	this	is	possible	only	in
absolute	blissfulness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Prepare	these	two	qualities	and	god	is	yours.	This	is	the	price	one	has	to	pay	for
god-realisation.
Meditation	 is	not	a	seasonal	 flower.	 It	 is	 like	a	cedar	of	Lebanon	--	a	big,	vast
tree	--	because	it	is	the	most	ambitious	project.	It	is	an	effort	to	touch	the	stars!	It
needs	time,	devotion,	patience,	and	an	infinite	capacity	to	wait,	because	one	can
never	be	certain	when	it	is	going	to	happen.	It	can	happen	this	moment,	it	may
happen	after	years.	It	is	unpredictable.
Only	one	thing	can	be	said:	the	more	patient	you	are,	the	quicker	it	happens.	If
your	 patience	 is	 absolute	 then	 it	 can	 happen	 even	 this	 moment,	 but	 if	 your
patience	is	not	enough,	then	it	will	take	a	longer	time.
Many	 people	 start	meditations	 but	 they	will	 do	 them	 for	 a	 few	 days	 and	 then
they	will	drop	the	whole	idea	saying	'Nothing	is	happening	--	why	bother?'
Do	 meditation	 without	 thinking	 of	 any	 result,	 enjoy	 meditating	 as	 an	 end	 in
itself.	 and	 then	 some	day	 the	 light	 explodes,	 the	 ego	disappears.	And	with	 the
ego	 death	 disappears.	 And	 with	 the	 ego	 death	 disappears	 and	 you	 enter	 into
eternity.
Jesus	calls	that	eternity	'the	kingdom	of	god.'
Cowards,	 weaklings	 cannot	 be	 religious,	 although	 temples	 and	 churches	 and
mosques	are	full	of	those	people	--	so	much	so	that	they	have	contaminated	the
whole	of	 religion	with	 fear.	 In	 almost	 all	 the	 languages	of	 the	world	 there	 are
words	 like	 'god-fearing'	 for	 the	 religious	 person.	 Now,	 the	 religious	 person	 is
absolutely	fearless;	he	is	not	god-fearing,	he	is	god-loving.	His	religion	is	out	of
love,	not	out	of	fear.
How	can	you	pray	out	of	fear?	How	can	you	love	out	of	fear?	You	can	hate	out
of	fear.
This	whole	accumulated	hatred	finally	exploded	in	Friedrich	Nietzsche	when	he
said	'God	is	dead	and	man	is	free.'	That	statement	is	symbolic,	very	symbolic.	It
represents	our	 century,	 it	 represents	modern	man	more	 than	anything	else.	For
thousands	of	years	man	has	been	told	to	be	afraid	of	god,	man	has	been	crippled,
paralysed	 with	 fear;	 and	 man	 has	 been	 told	 to	 be	 greedy.	 Fear	 and	 greed	 go
together,	they	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.	Fear	has	created	hell	and	greed
has	created	heaven;	they	are	projections	of	fear	and	greed.
The	religious	person	has	nothing	to	do	with	greed	and	fear.	The	religious	person
lives	in	love	and	bliss.
He	is	strong	enough	not	to	be	afraid	of	anything.	He	is	not	afraid	of	death.	Why
should	one	be	afraid	of	anything?	One	day	you	are	not.	Just	think	of	a	few	years
ago:	you	were	not	--	were	you	missing	anything?
So	even	after	death	you	won't	be	missing	anything.	It	is	such	a	simple	thing.	Just
a	few	years	ago	you	were	not	in	the	world	and	you	were	not	missing	anything;	I
think	you	were	perfectly	happy!	You	were	not	even	aware	of	happiness,	so	how
could	you	miss	anything?	At	 the	most,	whatsoever	 is	going	to	happen	in	death
you	will	 be	 the	 same:	 you	will	move	 back	 to	 the	 same	original	 state	 that	was
before	birth,	so	why	fear?	For	what?	What	has	life	given	to	you	that	death	can
take	away?	Nothing	has	been	given,	nothing	can	be	taken	away.
The	religious	man	lives	joyously:	there	is	nothing	to	be	afraid	of.	And	out	of	that
fearless	ness	a	rocklike	spirit	arises,	and	on	that	rocklike	spirit	one	can	make	a
temple	for	god	--	that's	the	only	possibility.
These	 two	 things,	 love	 and	meditation,	 have	 always	been	 separated	by	 the	 so-
called	 religious	 --	not	only	 separated	and	divided,	but	 almost	made	as	 if	 to	be
opposite	to	each	other.	For	centuries	religions	have	been	teaching	people:	if	you
love	you	will	miss	meditation,	so	drop	out	of	all	love	relationships,	move	into	a
monastery,	 remain	 bachelors,	 become	 a	monk.	 The	word	 'monk'	means	 living
alone;	the	word	'monk'	itself	means	one	who	lives	alone,	unrelated	to	anybody.
From	 the	 same	 root	 from	 which	 comes	 'monk'	 come	 words	 like	 'monopoly',
'monotony',	'monogamy'.
'Become	a	monk	or	become	a	nun.	Avoid	love,	escape	from	love,	only	then	can
you	attain	to	meditation'	--
this	 has	 been	 the	 teaching	 for	 centuries.	 Or	 if	 you	 want	 to	 move	 into	 the
dimension	of	love	then	forget	all	about	meditation.
So	the	world	has	been	divided	by	religious	people;	they	have	created	a	kind	of
schizophrenia.	 And	 the	 problem	 is	 that	 man	 needs	 both	 and	 he	 cannot	 be
contented	with	one;	it	is	impossible	to	be	contented	with	one.	There	is	a	certain
need	for	love	and	there	is	a	certain	need	for	meditation	too.
Meditation	 fulfils	 something,	 love	 fulfils	 something	 else.	 It	 is	 like	 telling	 a
person	 'Either	 you	 can	 eat	 or	 you	 can	 drink.	 If	 you	 eat,	 then	 you	 cannot	 be
allowed	 to	 drink	 anything;	 if	 you	want	 to	 drink	 anything	 then	you	 cannot	 eat.
Choose	one	 --	whatsoever	you	want.'	Now,	you	will	 drive	 that	man	crazy!	He
needs	both.
You	 tell	 somebody	 'Either	 you	 can	 remain	 awake	 or	 you	 can	 go	 to	 sleep	 --
choose.'	 These	 are	 opposite	 activities,	 and	 you	 cannot	 choose	 opposite	 things
because	that	will	create	troubles	for	you,	so	either	be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
awake	 or	 be	 asleep.'	 Now,	 nobody	 can	 choose	 one.	 You	 will	 need	 a	 certain
rhythm	between	waking	 and	 sleeping;	 you	will	 have	 to	move	 from	one	 to	 the
other.	 Waking	 you	 will	 create	 the	 necessity	 for	 sleep,	 sleep	 will	 create	 the
necessity	for	waking.
The	same	 is	 true	about	 love	and	meditation:	 if	you	 love	 it	creates	 the	need	 for
meditation.	People	don't	understand	 it,	because	 they	have	been	 told	 just	 stupid
things.	Whenever	you	love	somebody	sooner	or	later	you	will	feel	a	deep	need	to
be	alone,	 to	have	your	own	space,	 and	because	you	don't	understand	 the	 inner
psychology,	the	inner	rhythm,	you	start	 thinking,	 'What	has	happened?	Has	my
love	died?	Am	I	betraying	my	love?	What	is	happening	to	my	love	affair?'	And
the	person	you	 love	also	starts	 thinking	 'You	want	 to	be	alone?	You	want	your
own	 space?	 That	 means	 you	 don't	 love	 me	 anymore?'	 Both	 are	 absolutely
unconscious	of	the	inner	mechanism.
And	when	you	are	alone	soon	you	will	see	that	you	need	somebody	to	share	your
joy,	 to	 be	 with,	 and	 then	 you	 feel	 guilty	 again,	 as	 if	 you	 are	 betraying	 your
meditation.	This	whole	nonsense	has	been	created	by	the	priests.
My	effort	here	is	to	drop	this	whole	schizophrenic	culture	and	make	you	capable
of	both	together:	be	a	lover	and	a	meditator.	And	remember	the	rhythm,	that	both
are	enrichening	forces;	they	support	each	other,	they	are	not	contradictory,	they
are	complementaries.
This	is	something	new;	it	is	being	tried	for	the	first	time	in	the	world	of	religion.
My	 sannyasins	 are	 a	 totally	 new	 phenomenon	 in	 the	 history	 of	man;	 they	 are
trying	 to	 bridge	 something	 that	 has	 been	 broken	 for	 centuries.	 But	 once	 you
understand	 the	 inner	 mechanism,	 the	 inner	 rhythm...	 It	 is	 like	 breathing:	 the
breath	goes	out,	 then	it	comes	in.	If	somebody	says	 'Why	don't	you	choose?	--
either	throw	the	breath	out	and	stop,	or	take	it	in	and	stop.	What	is	the	point	of
continuously	breathing	in	and	out?	--	it	is	unnecessary	trouble.
Either	keep	it	in	or	keep	it	out	--	make	it	simple.'	His	advice	may	look	logical,
but	he	will	kill	you.
The	same	has	happened	with	love	and	meditation.	Love	is	like	exhalation:	your
energies	 go	 out	 to	 meet	 the	 other	 person.	 Meditation	 is	 like	 inhalation	 your
energies	go	in	to	the	deepest	core	of	your	being.	The	most	alive	man	is	one	who
is	capable	of	both	without	any	contradiction.	If	we	can	make	man	aware	of	this,
out	 of	 one	hundred	mind-problems,	 almost	 ninety-nine	per	 cent	will	 disappear
automatically.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007135
ShortTitle:	GWIND13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	builds	his	life	on	the	sands	of	dreams.	That's	why	whatsoever	one	tries	to
do,	 everything	 fails,	 all	 houses	 collapse.	 They	 don't	 have	 their	 foundation	 in
something	eternal,	they	are	founded	on	the	momentary.
And	when	one	house	of	sand	falls	we	start	making	another	house	--	of	the	same
material,	 with	 the	 same	 material.	 We	 never	 seem	 to	 learn	 any	 lesson:	 if	 one
dream	 fails	 we	 start	 dreaming,	 another	 dream;	 if	 one	 desire	 is	 frustrated	 we
immediately	 jump	 into	another	desire,	 another	project	 --	but	we	never	 see	 that
desire	as	such	is	bound	to	fail.
To	desire	means	 to	go	against	 the	whole.	 It	 is	an	 impossible	 task,	 it	 cannot	be
done.	Not	to	desire	means	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	relax	with	the	whole,	to	go	with	the	whole,	to	have	no	desire	of	one's	own,	it
means	 'Whatsoever	 the	whole	wills	 is	my	will.	 I	 am	not	 trying	 to	achieve	any
individual	goal.'
The	moment	 you	 start	 trying	 to	 achieve	 an	 individual	 goal	 you	 are	 bound	 for
trouble,	 because	 we	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 the	 whole,	 hence	 we	 can't	 have
separate	 goals.	 The	 English	word,	 idiot,	 is	 very	 significant	 in	 this	 context.	 Its
root	meaning	is	one	who	is	trying	to	achieve	something	individual.	He	is	an	idiot
because	his	failure	is	absolutely	certain.	Nobody	has	ever	succeeded	in	achieving
any	individual	goal.
We	have	 to	 learn	 to	 be	 part	 of	 life,	 existence.	We	 are	waves	 in	 the	 ocean:	we
cannot	have	individual	goals.	And	there	is	no	need	to	at	all.	And	because	of	the
individual	goals,	every	day	there	is	frustration,	every	day	there	is	misery.
Sannyas	means	seeing,	the	whole	absurdity	of	our	dreams	and	desires	then	trying
to	find	a	rocklike	phenomenon	on	which	a	house	can	be	built.	and	 that	 rock	 is
found	 only	 in	meditation	 because	meditation	moans	 a	 state	 of	 no-thought,	 no
desire,	no	dream.	Suddenly	you	are	on	solid	ground.	Now	each	moment	is	going
to	be	a	blissful	experience	and	each	moment	is	going	to	be	a	victory	--	not	yours
of	course,	because	you	are	no	more.
We	are	victorious	when	we	are	not,	and	when	we	are,	we	are	failures.	Meditation
means	coming	 to	know	 that	we	don't	exist	as	 separate	entities,	 that	we	are	not
islands;	we	are	part	of	the	infinite	continent	--
call	 it	 god,	 call	 it	 truth,	 the	 ultimate,	 the	 absolute	 or	 whatsoever	 name	 you
choose.
Lao	Tzu	says	'It	has	no	name,	hence	I	will	call	it	tao.'	It	has	no	name,	so	you	can
choose	 your	 own,	 or	 you	 can	 choose	 some	 name	 used	 by	 Jesus,	 Lao	 Tzu,
Buddha,	Krishna...	but	the	basic	secret	of	being	victorious	is	disappearing	totally
as	an	individual.	And	the	moment	there	are	no	desires,	no	dreams,	no	thoughts,
how	can	you	be?	Who	are	you	except	a	bundle	of	desires,	thoughts	and	dreams?
To	be	 a	 beloved	 disciple	 is	 the	 greatest	 gift	 of	 god.	There	 cannot	 be	 anything
greater	than	that.	The
'word	'disciple'	comes	from	the	same	root	as	discipline;	it	means	the	capacity	to
learn,	the	openness	to	learn,	the	availability	to	learn.	Very	few	people	are	capable
of	 learning.	Their	knowledge	hinders;	 they	already	know	too	much.	They	have
already	 arrived	 at	 some	 conclusions,	 hence	 they	 are	 always	 listening	 through
their	conclusions.	They	are	closed.
Coming	to	a	conclusion	means	that	your	mind	is	closed;	on	a	certain	subject	you
have	decided	that	this	is	the	end,	there	is	no	more	to	it.	That	means	conclusion.	A
real	 disciple,	 a	 learner,	 never	 concludes.	 He	 remains	 always	 open,	 he	 never
comes	to	a	full	stop.	He	knows	nothing	of	the	full	stop,	nothing	like	a	full	stop
exists	 in	 his	 consciousness.	 His	 consciousness	 is	 always	 an	 ongoing
phenomenon.	He	is	always	learning.	There	is	so	much	to	learn	that	only	stupid
people	can	conclude.
The	wiser	a	person	becomes,	the	more	aware	he	becomes	of	how	little	he	knows;
the	more	stupid	a	person	is,	the	more	certain	he	is	about	his	knowledge.	You	can
judge	the	stupidity	by	the	certainty.	The	stupids	are	very	fanatical	people	because
they	 have	 arrived	 at	 ultimate	 conclusions.	And	 not	 only	 have	 they	 arrived	 for
themselves,	 they	 have	 arrived	 for	 everybody.	 They	 want	 to	 impose	 their
conclusions	on	everybody,	on	the	whole	world.	They	think	they	are	being	very
compassionate	to	people.
You	must	 have	 come	 across	 Jehovah	witnesses	 or	Hari	Krishna	 people.	These
are	 the	 representatives	of	 the	most	 stupid	 fanatical	 types.	They	have	arrived	at
every	conclusion,	they	know	everything;	there	is	nothing	more	for	them	to	know.
Now	 their	whole	work	 is	 to	 force	 their	 knowledge	on	others,	whether	 you	 are
willing	to	accept	it	or	not.
Socrates	in	his	last	days	said	 'I	know	only	one	thing,	that	I	know	nothing.	And
that	was	the	day	he	became	the	greatest	wise	man	the	West	has	yet	known.	That
day	he	became	part	of	 the	great	company	of	 the	Buddhas.	That	day	he	was	no
more	a	philosopher,	that	day	he	became	awakened,	enlightened.
A	disciple	is	one	who	functions	through	a	state	of	not-knowing.	Whatsoever	he
knows	 is	 only	 hypothetical	 and	 he	 is	 always	 ready	 to	 change	 it	 --	 he	 is	 not	 a
fanatic.	He	loves	truth	so	much	that	he	cannot	decide	anything	about	truth	in	a
hasty	way.	His	love	is	so	great,	he	is	not	in	a	hurry.	He	knows	truth	is	vast
--	how	can	I	be	decisive	about	it?	At	the	most	I	can	say	that	this	much	I	feel	--
maybe,	perhaps	--	is	right.'
One	of	 the	greatest	men	the	East	has	produced	was	Mahavira.	He	used	to	start
every	sentence	with	a
'perhaps	'.	It	was	becoming	almost	annoying	to	his	disciples,	irritating.	He	would
always	start	every	statement	with	a	'perhaps'.	But	I	can	see	his	point.	This	is	the
non	--	fanatical	person.	If	you	ask	him	'Is	there	a	god?'	he	will	not	say	yes	or	no	;
he	 will	 say	 'Perhaps	 --	 perhaps	 yes,	 perhaps	 no.'	 He	 will	 not	 give	 you	 a
conclusion.	He	will	help	you	to	enquire,	he	will	push	you	into	the	enquiry.
That's	the	function	of	the	master:	to	push	you	into	the	enquiry.	He	does	not	give
you	 ready-made	 conclusions.	 He	 simply	 makes	 you	 aware	 of	 the	 tremendous
questions	of	life,	of	the	tremendous	mysteries	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
of	existence.	The	function	of	the	master	is	to	make	you	aware	of	the	mysteries
which	are	almost	unknowable.	And	the	function	of	the	disciple	is	to	be	able	to	go
along	with	the	master,	totally,	fully	--	and	he	can	go	totally	and	fully	only	if	he	is
not	 carrying	 any	 conclusions	 already.	 If	 he	 is	 a	 Christian	 or	 a	 Hindu	 or	 a
Mohammedan	he	cannot	be	a	disciple.
Disciplehood	 does	 not	 happen	 through	 the	 head,	 it	 happens	 through	 the	 heart.
The	head	is	full	of	conclusions,	the	heart	is	always	innocent	and	always	ready	to
know.	The	heart	is	always	a	child	and	the	head	is	always	an	old	man.	The	head	is
never	young,	remember,	and	the	heart	is	never	old.
To	be	a	beloved	disciple	means	to	live	in	the	heart,	to	live	through	the	heart,	to
remain	fresh,	young,	open,	available,	 to	be	capable	of	dropping	all	conclusions
and	knowledge	and	scriptures.	The	disciple	has	to	be	courageous	enough	to	burn
all	 the	 scriptures	 --	 I	mean	 symbolically,	 not	 literally	 --	 and	 just	 to	 live	out	of
love,	not	out	of	logic..	Then	life	becomes	an	infinite	wonder,	then	each	moment
brings	new	surprises,	then	one	is	always	in	a	state	of	awe.
And	to	remain	in	that	state	continuously	is	ecstasy,	is	bliss,	is	benediction.
Man	 cannot	 get	 out	 of	 misery	 unless	 he	 realises	 something	 in	 him	 which	 is
deathless.	Death	 is	 the	 root	cause	of	all	our	 fears	 --	and	we	are	surrounded	by
death.	 Whenever	 you	 see	 somebody	 dying	 you	 are	 reminded	 of	 your	 death.
Never	ask	for	whom	the	bell	tolls	--	it	always	tolls	for	you.
People	 don't	 like	 to	 talk	 about	 death.	 It	 is	 not	 thought	 to	 be	 polite,	mannerly,
cultured,	 to	 talk	 about	 death,	 because	 it	 reminds	 everybody	 of	 his	 own	 death
which	is	always	there,	hanging	like	a	naked	sword	from	a	very	thin	thread:	it	can
fall	any	moment!	Just	a	little	breeze	is	enough	and	it	can	fall	on	you.	How	can
you	 enjoy	 life?	How	can	 you	 live	 totally	when	 death	 is	 always	 following	 you
like	a	shadow?	It	contaminates	all	your	joys.
It	is	a	well-known	fact,	observed	almost	all	over	the	world	by	all	the	researchers,
that	 people	 are	 afraid	 of	 love	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	when	 they	move	 into
love-making	 a	 moment	 of	 deep	 orgasmic	 joy	 comes	 when	 they	 suddenly
experience	 themselves	as	being	close	 to	death,	melting,	disappearing,	and	 they
become	frightened,	they	become	frozen.
It	is	one	of	the	causes	why	millions	of	women	never	achieve	orgasm;	they	hold
back,	they	remain	cold.
Of	course	 they	have	rationalised	 it	 in	many	ways	--	 that	 that	 is	good,	 ladylike.
And	millions	of	men	suffer	from	premature	ejaculation	for	the	simple	reason;	the
same	 reason	 they	 are	 so	 afraid,	 and	 out	 of	 fear	 they	 cannot	 attain	 to	 a	mature
ejaculation.	Before	 the	orgasm	happens	 their	 energy	 is	 released.	 It	 is	 a	way	of
avoiding	 the	 orgasm,	 it	 is	 a	 very	 subtle	 strategy.	Women	 become	 frigid,	 men
either	start	having	immature	ejaculations	or	at	a	later	stage	of	life	they	become
impotent.	And	now	 this	 is	 a	 perfectly	well-known	 fact	 that	 very	 rarely	 does	 a
man	 become	 impotent,	 very	 rarely	 --	 one	 man	 in	 a	 thousand,	 maybe	 --	 but
millions	 suffer	 from	 the	 idea	of	 impotency.	The	 idea	 is	 their	own,	 imposed	on
themselves.	And	the	reason	is	very	deep,	it	is	beyond	psychology	to	help.
Only	meditation	can	help,	because	only	meditation	can	make	you	aware	that	you
are	deathless.	In	fact,	even	if	you	want	to	die	you	cannot,	there	is	no	way	to	die.
You	were	never	born	and	you	will	never	die.	You	were	before	birth	and	you	will
remain	after	death.	Birth	is	only	entering	into	a	certain	body	and	death	is	leaving
that	certain	body	--	but	you	are	eternal.
To	 experience	 this	 eternity,	 this	 deathlessness,	 becomes	 the	 foundation	 of	 a
totally	new	life,	a	new	life-style:	fearless,	without	misery,	without	anxiety,	a	life
which	is	orgasmic	--	not	only	in	the	sexual	sense...
because	 that	 is	 only	 one	 of	 the	 dimensions	 of	 orgasm.	 There	 are	 many
dimensions	of	being	orgasmic.
A	 really	 orgasmic	 person	 knows	 many	 dimensions	 of	 orgasm.	 Looking	 at	 a
beautiful	sunset	he	is	in	an	orgasm	--	an	absolutely	non-sexual	orgasm.	Watching
the	sky	full	of	stars	he	goes	into	an	orgasm;	that	orgasm	has	nothing	to	do	with
sex.	Listening	to	music	or	dancing	or	just	sitting	silently	doing	nothing,	resting
in	oneself,	there	is	great	joy;	all	the	cells	of	the	body	are	dancing,	rejoicing.
A	 person	 starts	 living	 bliss	 each	 moment	 if	 only	 one	 experience	 becomes
possible:	that	of	deathlessness.
Hence	the	East	has	never	bothered	much	about	psychology,	for	the	simple	reason
that	the	eastern	understanding	has	been	this,	that	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent
of	 psychological	 problems	 are	 not	 basically	 psychological,	 they	 are	 rooted	 in
spiritual	 ignorance.	Once	 that	 ignorance	 disappears,	 those	 problems	 disappear.
Western	psychology	goes	on	analysing.	That	analysis	 is	 simply	absurd,	 it	goes
on	and	on.	No	psychoanalysis	is	ever	complete	--	cannot	be	--	it	is	moving	in	a
vicious	circle.	You	analyse	one	thing,	there	is	still	another	thing;	you	analyse	that
and	 then	 a	 third	 thing	 bubbles	 up,	 because	 the	 centre	 of	 the	 problem	 is	 never
touched,	the	root	is	never	cut.	You	go	on	pruning	the	leaves	and	new	leaves	go
on	coming.	The	foliage	in	fact	becomes	far	thicker	than	it	was	before.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Psychologists	 suffer	more	 from	 psychological	 problems	 than	 anybody	 else	 for
the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	know	how	 to	 prune	 the	 leaves	 and	how	 to	 cut	 the
branches,	 so	 their	 problems	 become	 more	 and	 more	 thick	 and	 bigger	 and
stronger,	and	the	roots	are	intact,	the	roots	are	underground,	hidden...
Ordinarily	 psychologists	 don't	 think	 that	 meditation	 can	 do	 anything	 because
they	are	not	aware	of	 the	roots	--	and	meditation's	whole	function	 is	 to	cut	 the
roots.	Once	the	roots	are	cut	the	tree	withers	away	by	itself.
Love	makes	man	an	ocean,	an	infinity.	It	gives	a	kind	of	unboundedness.	It	helps
you	to	know	that	you	are	not	defined	by	any	limits,	that	you	are	not	confined	by
the	body	or	the	mind,	that	you	are	not	confined	at	all,	that	you	are	as	vast	as	the
sky;	in	fact,	even	the	sky	is	not	the	limit.	There	is	no	limit	to	you.
This	 is	 the	 beauty	 of	 love,	 it	 makes	 you	 aware	 of	 vastness.	 That	 is	 the	 first
experience	of	godliness.	And	 if	 the	 first	 experience	happens,	 then	other	 things
follow	 in	 their	 own	 time.	 The	 first	 experience	 triggers	 a	 process.	 Then
everything	 follows,	 then	 you	 have	 not	 to	 do	 anything	 else.	 Just	 one	 thing	 you
have	to	do,	that	is	to	start	with	love.
Love	 as	much	 as	 you	 can,	 as	many	people	 as	 possible	 --	 not	 only	 people,	 but
animals,	birds,	 trees,	 stars,	 rocks.	When	 I	 say	 love,	 I	mean	become	 loving.	Be
love,	 so	whatsoever	you	do,	 it	 should	have	 the	 flavor	of	 love,	whatsoever	you
touch	you	 should	 touch	with	 love,	whatsoever	 you	 say	you	 should	 say	 it	with
love.	In	the	beginning	it	is	hard	because	we	are	so	unconscious.
A	man	 came	 to	meet	 a	 great	 Zen	master,	 Lin	 Chi.	 He	 pushed	 open	 the	 door,
threw	off	his	shoes	and	went	 in.	The	master	was	watching	and	a	 few	disciples
were	sitting	with	him.	The	man	touched	the	master's	feet,	the	master	said,	"Don't
touch	my	feet,	because	I	will	have	to	take	a	bath!"	The	man	said,	"What	are	you
saying?	 Why	 should	 you	 have	 to	 take	 a	 bath?	 I	 am	 not	 impure	 or	 dirty	 or
anything."	The	master	said,	"You	are!	In	the	way	you	opened	the	door	there	was
anger,	 in	the	way	you	threw	your	shoes	there	was	anger.	You	misbehaved	with
the	shoes,	you	misbehaved	with	the	door	--	which	have	not	done	anything	wrong
to	you.
So	your	bowing	down	to	me	is	just	formality,	deep	down	you	are	full	of	anger.
Close	your	eyes	and	see!"
The	man	had	to	close	his	eyes	and	he	could	see	it	was	so.
The	master	said,	"If	you	see	that	what	I	am	saying	is	right,	then	go	and	first	bow
down	to	your	shoes,	ask	forgiveness."	The	man	said,	"What	are	you	saying?	Are
you	mad	or	something?	--	bowing	down	to	the	shoes,	my	own	shoes	and	asking
their	forgiveness?	They	are	dead	things!"
The	master	said,	"If	you	could	be	angry	with	 them	and	you	never	 thought	 that
you	were	being	angry	with	dead	things,	why	can	you	not	ask	their	forgiveness?
Unless	you	ask	forgiveness	from	the	shoes	and	the	doors	I	am	not	going	to	even
talk	to	you.	Simply	get	out,	be	lost!"
The	man	could	see	the	point.	He	went	and	bowed	down	to	the	shoes,	to	the	door.
And	 later	 on	 he	 came	 back	 with	 tears	 in	 his	 eyes	 and	 he	 said	 to	 the	 master,
"Never	in	my	life	have	I	felt	so	happy.	At	first	bowing	down	to	my	shoes	I	felt
very	embarrassed.	But	when	I	really	bowed	down,	I	was	immensely	happy.
Something	 inside	me,	 the	whole	 climate,	 immediately	 changed,	 as	 if	 suddenly
spring	had	come	and	flowers	had	bloomed."
Watch	 your	 life.	Don't	 be	 in	 any	way	 rude	 to	 anything,	 not	 even	 dead	 things,
because	 in	 fact	 nothing	 is	 dead.	 If	 god	 permeates	 everything	 then	 nothing	 is
dead.	A	 rock	 is	 only	 a	 soul	 very	 fast	 asleep,	 so	 fast	 asleep	 that	 it	 is	 not	 even
breathing,	in	a	coma.	But	it	is	as	alive	as	anybody	else.
Be	love...	and	you	will	know	what	sannyas	is.	Sannyas	is	an	experience	of	love,
and	love	brings	you	to	the	oceanic,	to	the	unbounded,	to	the	vast.	The	door	of	the
temple	opens,	and	without	your	knowing	suddenly	you	enter	the	shrine.
No	churches,	temples	and	mosques	can	help	you.	Only	this	door	I	am	talking	is
the	real	door	to	the	real	temple	where	you	will	find	the	real	god.
Love	simply	moans	surrendering	the	ego.	Don't	 live	any	more	as	an	ego,	Drop
the	 idea	 that	you	are	separate,	 forget	completely	 that	you	are	a	different	entity.
We	are	rooted	in	existence,	we	are	one	with	it,	part	of	it	;	we	live	through	it,	it
lives	 through	 us.	We	 are	 intertwined,	we	 are	 interdependent.	You	 cannot	 exist
without	the	whole,	and	the	whole	also	cannot	exist	without	you.	If	it	could	exist
without	you	it	would	have	existed	without	you.	Just	that	you	are	is	proof	enough
that	existence	needs	you	in	some	way,	you	are	fulfilling	a	certain	need.
Even	 the	 smallest	 blade	 of	 grass	 is	 as	 needed	 as	 the	 greatest	 star.	There	 is	 no
hierarchy	in	existence.
Nobody	is	higher	and	nobody	is	lower,	and	nobody	is	more	needed	and	nobody
is	less	needed.	All	is	needed	because	existence	means	the	togetherness	of	all.	We
all	contribute	something	to	existence,	and	existence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
goes	on	giving	to	us	everything	that	we	need.
Once	this	interdependence	is	understood	life	starts	having	a	new	kind	of	beauty
and	grace.	Then	there	are	no	problems.	Problems	are	created	by	the	ego;	because
the	 ego	 is	 a	 false	 entity	 it	 creates	 problems.	 It	 lives	 in	 anxiety,	 fear,	 always
afraid,	always	cautious:	something	may	go	wrong...
The	 moment	 the	 ego	 is	 dropped	 nothing	 can	 go	 wrong.	 Nothing	 ever	 goes
wrong:	all	is	perfectly	right	as	it	is.	That's	exactly	the	meaning	of	god	--	that	all
is	good	as	it	is.
Samarpan	(her	name)	defines	sannyas.	Samarpan	means	surrender,	let-go.	Those
two	words	'let',	'go',	are	my	whole	message.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007145
ShortTitle:	GWIND14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	lives	in	misery	because	of	cowardliness.	There	is	no	other	cause	for	it.	It	is
fear	 of	 the	 unknown	 that	 keeps	man	 clinging	 to	 his	misery,	 because	misery	 is
known,	well-known.	We	 are	 born	 in	 it,	 we	 are	 brought	 up	 in	 it,	 we	 see	 it	 all
around	--	everybody	is	miserable,	the	whole	crowd	is	miserable.	It	is	the	climate,
the	atmosphere.	To	be	blissful	means	to	transcend	this	climate,	this	atmosphere,
to	 go	 beyond	 the	 limits	 of	 the	 crowd,	 to	 move	 into	 the	 unknown	 and	 the
unacquainted	and	the	uncharted.
It	is	the	fear	of	the	unknown	that	keeps	us	clinging	to	all	kinds	of	suffering.	The
suffering	is	not	clinging	to	you,	you	cling	to	it.	People	prefer	suffering	more	than
nothing.
Sannyas	begins	with	changing	your	preference.	Nothing	 is	not	only	better	 that
suffering,	it	is	better	than	everything,	it	is	better	than	the	whole.	To	be	nothing,
to	be	a	nobody,	to	be	an	utter	non	entity	certainly	needs	guts.	It	is	moving	to	the
farthest	 shore	without	knowing	whether	 it	 exists	or	not.	 It	 is	 losing	 this	 shore,
which	 has	 become	 very	 well-known,	 and	 taking	 a	 quantum	 leap	 towards
something	which	may	be,	may	not	be	--	there	is	no	guarantee.
That's	why	a	master	is	needed.	A	master	is	not	a	guarantee	of	the	unknown,	for
the	 unknown,	 but	 a	 witness.	 He	 cannot	 guarantee	 truth	 for	 you.	We	 can	 only
share:	'It	is	--	I	have	known	it,	I	am	a	witness	to	it.'
And	if,	looking	into	his	eyes,	you	can	feel	the	trust,	if	you	can	feel	his	love	and
your	love	for	him,	then	something	starts	transpiring,	then	something	mysterious
starts	happening.	That	mysterious	relationship	is	disciplehood,	that	is	sannyas.	It
is	the	most	mysterious	experience	of	life.	Even	the	experience	of	love	is	nothing
compared	to	it.
Man	lives	in	bondage	because	man	lives	in	the	mind.	Mind	is	a	bondage.	Mind	is
not	yours,	remember.
Mind	is	implanted	in	you	by	the	society;	hence	there	are	as	many	minds	as	there
are	societies,	cultures,	religions.
A	Christian	mind	is	different	from	a	Jewish	mind,	a	Hindu	mind	is	different	from
a	Mohammedan	mind,	an	atheist	mind	is	certainly	different	from	a	theist	mind.
And	these	minds	are	cultivated	by	others;	they	are	impositions	by	others	on	you.
But	 the	 imposition	 is	 so	 subtle	 that	 you	 are	not	 even	 aware	of	 it,	 that	 you	 are
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
being	forced	by	your	parents	and	 the	society	 to	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a
Communist,	that	this	is	not	your	own	choice,	that	you	have	not	chosen	it	out	of
freedom.	So	 freedom	was	 never	 given	 to	 you;	 you	were	 not	 even	 asked,	 your
permission	has	not	even	been	taken.	But	for	years	it	has	been	forced,	repeatedly,
so	it	becomes	a	deep	conditioning	in	you.
Meditation	means	dropping	 the	 identity	with	 the	mind,	knowing	 that	 'I	 am	not
the	mind	that	I	have	always	supposed	myself	to	be,	that	I	am	separate	from	my
mind,	 that	 I	 am	 just	 a	 witness,	 a	 consciousness,	 that	 I	 am	 neither	 Hindu	 nor
Mohammedan	nor	Christian,	that	I	don't	belong	to	any	country,	to	any	church,	to
any	 ideology.'	 The	 moment	 this	 becomes	 your	 experience	 you	 start	 living	 in
freedom.
Meditation	brings	freedom.	It	releases	you	from	the	subtlest	kind	of	bondage.	A
meditator	is	simply	religious.	He	does	not	believe	in	any	dogma.	He	knows	by
his	experience	that	the	world	does	not	end	in	matter,	that	there	are	higher	realms
than	matter,	that	the	whole	existence	is	immersed	in	godliness.
When	this	is	your	experience	it	is	a	totally	different	thing:	it	is	not	a	belief,	it	is
knowing,	it	is	wisdom,	it	is	a	light	within	your	being.	It	makes	you	totally	free
from	the	past,	from	all	kinds	of	societies	and	cultures.
For	the	first	time	you	know	who	you	are;	you	become	an	independent	soul.	That
is	real	birth,	a	resurrection.
That's	the	whole	purpose	of	sannyas	--	it	is	a	process	of	being	reborn.
Love	is	 the	greatest	rebellion	known	to	man,	because	it	 is	rebellion	against	 the
ego.	It's	way	very	few	people	love.	Very	few	people	ever	gather	enough	courage
to	move	into	the	world	of	love	for	the	simple	reason	that	they	cannot	drop	their
ego	--	and	it	is	a	prerequisite.	Love	happens	only	when	you	can	merge	your	ego,
when	you	can	put	 it	aside,	when	you	can	say	 'I	am	not	 --	you	are.'	This	 is	 the
beginning	of	 love	when	one	 says	 'I	 am	not-	you	are.'	And	when	 the	 'you'	 also
disappears	 that	 is	 the	end	of	 love,	 that	 is	 the	climax	of	 love,	 the	highest	peak,
where	 I	 and	 thou	 both	 disappear.	And	 there	 is	 an	 organic	 unity	where	 duality
disappears.
It	 can	happen	between	 two	 individuals.	That	 is	 just	 like	 learning	 swimming	 in
shallow	 water.	 Naturally	 when	 one	 learns,	 one	 learns	 in	 shallow	 water,	 in	 a
swimming	pool.	You	don't	start	learning	in	the	ocean,	you	don't	start	going	into
the	deep	waters.	But	once	you	know	how	 to	 swim	 then	you	can	go.	 It	 doesn't
matter	whether	the	water	is	one	mile	deep	or	five	miles	deep;	it	can	be	infinitely
deep	--	it	makes	no	difference.
Love	between	two	persons	is	only	a	 lesson	for	 the	ultimate	 love:	 love	between
you	and	the	whole	existence.
But	 those	 people	who	 have	 never	 even	 loved	 individuals	 cannot	 hope	 to	 love
god:	god	means	the	whole.
And	there	are	stupid	people	all	over	the	world	who	think	they	love	god,	although
they	don't	love	their	wives,	they	don't	love	their	husbands,	they	don't	love	their
children.	 In	 fact	 their	whole	 idea	 is	 that	 if	 you	want	 to	 love	 god,	 you	have	 to
drop	 loving	 everybody	 else;	 you	 have	 to	 renounce	 all	 love	 relationships,	 then
you	can	love	god.	Their	god	is	a	very	jealous	god,	like	a	jealous	wife	or	like	a
jealous	 husband.	Their	 god	 is	 as	 stupid	 as	 they	 are.	 It	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 because
your	god	is	always	your	projection;	it	is	as	stupid	or	as	intelligent	as	you	are.	In
fact	god	is	always	a	mirror:	it	only	reflects	your	face.	If	you	have	a	monkey	face
it	cannot	reflect	any	angel	in	it.
So	monkeys	have	monkey-gods	 --	Hanuman.	And	 in	 India	you	will	 find	many
Hanuman.	Those	are	monkey	gods.	That	simply	shows	one	thing,	that	there	are
many	monkeys	 in	 India,	otherwise	how	 is	 a	man	going	 to	worship	a	monkey?
Something	monkeyish	must	be	there.
Darwin	never	came	to	know	about	it,	otherwise	he	would	have	incorporated	it	in
his	theory	of	the	evolution	of	humanity.	Hanuman	could	have	become	a	part	in
proving	 his	 theory.	 That	 Hanuman	 seems	 to	 be	 an	 ancestral	 god;	 people	 still
remember	something	of	the	past	--	he	is	a	very	ancient	god.	The	very	idea	of	god
is	always	a	reflection	of	your	mind.
The	people	who	think	against	love,	who	renounce	love,	cannot	love	god	either.
Their	god	is	only	a	strategy	to	avoid	 love.	And	god	is	so	abstract	 that	you	can
pretend	you	love	god	without	any	trouble,	without	any	problem;	there	is	no	risk
in	it.	To	love	a	woman	or	a	man	is	risky:	it	creates	trouble,	it	brings	a	thousand
and	one	agonies.	Of	course	it	also	brings	ecstasies,	but	they	are	always	balanced:
the	deeper	the	ecstasies,	the	deeper	will	be	the	agonies.	If	you	want	to	avoid	the
ecstasies	then	you	can	avoid	the	agonies	too.	Then	you	can	have	a	smooth	wife-
husband	 relationship	 --	 the	 normal,	 the	 traditional,	 the	 orthodox,	 the	 polite
British	type.	Then	there	is	no	problem.	But	if	you	want	a	real	love	relationship	in
which	 there	 is	 some	 possibility	 of	 ecstasy	 then	 there	 is	 always	 a	 similar
possibility	of	agony.	If	you	reach	peaks	then	you	will	have	to	have	valleys	too;
the	 higher	 the	 peaks,	 the	 deeper	 will	 be	 the	 valleys.	 It	 will	 be	 in	 the	 same
proportion,	exactly	balancing.
But	with	the	love	of	god	you	don't	have	anything	--	it	is	just	an	abstract	idea.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
My	idea	of	love	is	not	abstract,	it	is	very	pragmatic,	realistic.	I	am	not	an	idealist
at	all,	I	am	very	down-to-earth.	Start	loving	people	make	it	your	foundation,	and
then	slowly	move	towards	higher	realities.
If	you	can	love	human	beings,	if	you	can	love	animals,	if	you	can	love	trees	and
rocks,	then	only	are	you	capable	of	loving	god.	And	then	your	god	will	not	be	an
abstraction,	then	your	god	will	be	simply	the	totality	of	existence.	Then	it	will	be
the	whole	universe	--	the	stars	and	the	moon	and	the	sun.	Then	it	will	be	simply
the	total	of	all.	And	that	 love	needs	only	one	thing:	slowly	slowly	you	have	to
die	as	an	ego.	And	the	more	you	die	as	an	ego,	the	more	you	are	born	as	a	soul.
This	I	call	a	rebellion.	All	other	rebellions	are	not	rebellions;	they	are	just	small
things	--	political	revolutions,	reforms	but	not	rebellions.
The	 only	 revolution	 worth	 calling	 rebellion	 is	 when	 you	 are	 capable	 of
discarding	the	whole	idea	of	the	ego	and	you	are	ready	to	disappear	into	love	just
like	a	dewdrop	disappears	into	the	ocean	and	becomes	the	ocean.
Every	 man	 is	 born	 with	 a	 divine	 treasure	 within	 him.	 And	 in	 fact	 we	 are
searching	for	it	for	our	whole	life,	but	we	go	on	searching	in	wrong	directions.
We	go	on	searching	for	it	outside,	and	it	is	not	there	so	it	cannot	be	found.
It	 is	within	you,	it	 is	your	very	nature,	so	unless	one	explores	withinwards	one
never	finds	it.
The	people	who	have	searched	for	it	on	the	outside	have	never	found	it.	There	is
not	a	single	exception;	without	any	exception	they	have	all	failed.	Still,	man	is	so
stupid,	he	goes	on	doing	the	same	thing	again	and	again.
And	 the	 people	 who	 have	 explored	 within	 have	 always	 found	 it	 --	 that	 too,
without	exception.	A	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Zarathustra,	a	Lao	Tzu	--	anybody	who
has	ever	gone	in	has	always	found	it.	Nobody	has	ever	failed	there.	But	such	is
the	stupidity	of	man	that	he	never	listens	to	these	people.
It	 is	 good	 that	 you	 are	 here	 and	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 move	 into	 sannyas.	 It	 can
become	a	tremendously	significant	decision	in	your	life.	If	you	really	make	it	a
commitment,	 if	 you	 really	 get	 involved	 in	 this	 pilgrimage	 you	 will	 be
tremendously	enriched,	you	will	be	able	to	find	the	kingdom	of	god.	And	that	is
the	only	thing	worth	finding	--	everything	else	is	futile.
It	 is	 contentment	 that	 brings	 bliss.	 We	 live	 in	 discontentment,	 we	 axe	 never
contented	with	anything.
The	mind	always	goes	on	asking	for	more	that	is	the	nature	of	the	mind	--	and
those	 who	 follow	 mind	 will	 remain	 in	 misery.	 They	 can	 even	 become	 great
emperors	--	they	will	be	beggars.	Even	Alexander	the	Great	lived	like	a	beggar
and	died	like	a	beggar.
By	beggar	I	mean	a	person	who	is	always	begging	for	more.	By	emperor	I	mean
a	person	who	is	immensely	contented	with	whatsoever	he	has	got.	It	is	a	change
of	gestalt,	a	shift	of	our	total	consciousness.
Just	look	at	all	that	god	has	already	given	to	you...	and	it	is	inestimable,	it	is	so
much	that	nobody	is	worthy	of	it.	We	have	not	earned	it,	we	don't	deserve	it	--
god	gives	out	of	his	abundance	but	we	never	feel	grateful.
In	 this	 ungratefulness	 misery	 lives	 and	 becomes	 stronger	 every	 day.
Discontentment	is	food	for	misery,	and	contentment	is	nourishment	for	bliss.
Change	 your	 energy	 from	 discontentment	 to	 contentment	 and	 you	 will	 be
surprised	 by	 the	 transformation:	 immediately	 there	 is	 gratitude,	 thankfulness.
And	whatsoever	one	has	got	one	feels	so	happy	with	 it	 that	small	 thing	of	 life
start	 bringing	 tremendous	 joy.	 Just	 a	 cup	 of	 tea	 can	 be	 as	 bliss-giving	 as	 the
whole	of	paradise;	a	cup	of	tea	can	contain	the	whole	of	paradise.	It	all	depends
on	 you,	 on	 how	 you	 look	 at	 it.	 Otherwise	 the	 whole	 of	 paradise	 will	 not	 be
capable	of	satisfying	you;	you	will	start	finding	faults	there.
The	way	of	sannyas	is	the	way	of	contentment.
Meditation	opens	your	 inner	consciousness	like	the	sun	opens	the	flowers.	The
sun	does	not	make	any	effort;	it	does	not	force	the	petals	of	the	flowers	to	open
up	--	just	the	presence	is	enough,	the	warmth	is	enough.	The	presence	of	the	sun
functions	like	a	catalytic	agent.	Something	inside	the	flower	immediately	starts
opening	up,	as	if	the	flower	suddenly	feels	a	deep	trust,	there	is	no	need	to	hides
it	can	open	up,	it	can	open	all	the	doors	and	all	the	windows.
The	same,	exactly	the	same	happens	in	meditation.	Meditation	simply	creates	an
inner	warmth.	The	non-meditative	person	is	ice-cold	inside.	He	has	no	heart,	he
is	just	mind,	and	mind	is	ice-cold.	The	meditative	person's	energy	starts	moving
from	the	head	to	the	heart;	the	heart	starts	becoming	warmer.	You	actually	start
feeling	the	warmth	inside,	and	in	that	warmth	your	being	opens	up	like	a	flower.
And	that	opening	is	the	fulfilment.	In	that	opening	one	feels	one	has	come	home.
In	that	opening	one	knows	how	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nothing	is	missing	--	this	is	it!
A	man	without	love	is	like	a	plastic	flower,	a	paper	flower	with	no	perfume.	He
looks	 like	 a	 flower,	 he	 looks	 like	 a	 man,	 but	 he	 is	 not	 really	 a	 man.	 A	 man
becomes	a	man	only	when	his	heart	starts	throbbing	with	love.	With	love	man	is
no	more	an	ordinary	animal,	he	starts	becoming	extraordinary;	he	starts	moving
upwards.	Otherwise	 he	 is	 just	 like	 other	 animals.	He	has	 a	 bigger	mind,	more
efficient	 --	 that's	 the	 only	 difference.	 The	 difference	 is	 quantitative,	 and	 a
quantitative	difference	is	not	a	difference	at	all.
The	real	difference	is	only	when	there	is	a	difference	of	quality.	And	love	is	the
only	thing	that	brings	a	new	quality	to	you,	otherwise	everything	else	is	available
to	animals	also.
Sex	 is	 available	 to	 them,	 but	 no	 love.	 They	 also	 have	 a	 certain	 kind	 of
intelligence.	For	 example,	 some	 animals	 have	 a	 very	 good	memory.	There	 are
some	 species	 of	 snakes	 which	 have	 such	 a	 memory	 that	 for	 years	 they	 will
remember	 to	 take	 revenge;	 they	 will	 not	 forget.	 Elephants	 have	 a	 very	 good
memory.	For	years	 they	will	remember;	even	after	a	 ten,	 twelve-year	gap,	 they
will	be	able	to	recognise	the	friend	and	the	enemy,	immediately.
Once	I	went	to	visit	a	fort	of	a	maharaja	--	he	himself	had	not	gone	to	the	fort	for
eight	 years.	 Just	 to	 show	me	 he	went	with	me,	 and	 at	 least	 a	 dozen	 peacocks
came	and	started	dancing.	I	asked	him	'What	is	the	matter?"	And	he	said	'They
recognise	us.	Whenever	anybody	of	my	family	comes	they	will	receive	us	with
dance.	After	eight	years	I	have	come	but	they	have	not	forgotten.'
Just	to	experiment,	the	next	year	when	I	went	there	I	took	his	wife	with	me,	and
the	same	thing	happened.	I	enquired	of	the	servant,	they	said	'They	won't	dance
with	anybody	else	--	only	the	royal	family.
They	 recognise	 who	 the	 royal	 persons	 are.	 For	 only	 a	 few	 people...	 if	 the
maharaja,	 his	 wife,	 his	 son,	 if	 these	 three	 persons	 come	 they	 will	 dance,
otherwise	 they	 won't	 dance.	 No	 effort	 can	 persuade	 them	 to	 dance.	 And	 they
have	 been	 here	 for	many	 centuries:	 their	 parents	were	 dancing,	 the	 parents	 of
their	parents	were	dancing.	It	 is	as	 if	 they	have	inherited	the	memory	and	they
continue	the	tradition.'
Now	 the	maharaja	 is	 no	more	 a	maharaja,	 because	maharajas	 and	 their	 states
have	disappeared.	Nobody	recognises	him	any	more,	but	those	peacocks	do.
Animals	have	their	own	memory	system,	they	have	a	certain	intelligence	of	their
own.	Only	one	thing	is	missing:	they	don't	know	what	love	is,	they	can't	know.
Even	 out	 of	 one	 hundred	men,	 ninety-nine	 never	 know	what	 love	 is.	The	 rare
individual	comes	to	know	love.
My	vision	of	 a	 real	man	 requires	 two	 things:	 love	 and	meditation.	But	 love	 is
needed	far	more	essentially,	because	if	man	can	love	he	is	bound	to	find,	sooner
or	later,	the	way	to	meditation,	because	love	itself	gives	you	certain	glimpses	of
meditation.	It	makes	you	silent.	Then	two	lovers	meet,	if	they	are	really	in	love,
they	have	nothing	 to	say	 to	each	other.	They	may	hold	hands	and	 they	will	 sit
silently.	The	silence	is	too	significant	to	disturb	by	anything	else.
Love	 gives	 a	 few	 glimpses	 of	meditation,	 naturally.	 Love	 is	 a	 natural	 kind	 of
meditation,	and	because	it	is	a	natural	kind	it	can	become	a	good	jumping	board
for	meditation.
So	begin	with	 love.	Love	as	deeply	as	possible,	as	widely	as	possible,	because
the	 wider	 the	 love,	 the	 more	 rich	 your	 inner	 being	 becomes.	 Love	 as	 many
people	as	possible,	because	each	person	 is	unique	and	each	experience	unique.
And	 love	 not	 only	man,	 love	 animals,	 because	 they	 have	 a	 different	 plane	 of
existence.	Your	 love	of	 them	will	make	you	aware	of	 their	 plane	of	 existence.
Love	 trees	 too,	 birds	 too,	 then	 you	 become	 multi-dimensional	 and	 your	 life
becomes	more	and	more	enriched.
That	enrichment	 is	what	religions	have	called	 the	birth	of	 the	soul.	 I	call	 it	 the
perfume	of	 love.	And	 then	one	day	out	 of	 that	 perfume	you	will	 start	moving
into	meditation	naturally.
Meditation	is	a	transcendence,	a	transcendence	of	all	identities.	We	are	identified
with	 the	 body.	 The	 first	 step	 of	 meditation	 destroys	 that	 identity;	 we	 become
aware	 that	we	are	not	 the	body.	Then	we	become	aware	 that	we	are	 identified
with	the	mind,	with	the	thought	process.	That	is	the	second	step	of	meditation:	it
destroys	that	identity	and	makes	us	aware	that	we	are	not	minds	either.	And	the
third	and	the	most	important	and	the	deepest	step	is	that	we	are	identified	with
the	heart,	with	our	feelings,	emotions.
Meditation	destroys	that	too.
These	 are	 the	 three	 steps,	 the	 three	 great	 negations,	 and	 out	 of	 these	 three
negations	 comes	 the	 most	 positive	 phenomenon	 in	 existence:	 suddenly	 you
become	aware	of	who	you	are.	But	you	become	perfectly	aware	of	who	you	are
not.
To	know	the	false	as	false	is	the	beginning	of	knowing	the	true	as	true.	So	real
religion	 starts	 in	 negation	 and	 ends	 in	 absolute	 affirmation.	 It	 starts	 with	 no,
three	no	ss	no	to	the	body,	no	to	the	mind,	no	to	the	heart.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	 then	a	miracle	happens:	out	of	 these	 three	no's	you	suddenly	attain	 to	 the
biggest	yes	that	you	have	ever	seen	in	your	life,	ever	experienced	in	your	life	--	a
total	 yes,	 an	 absolute	 yes.	 That	 yes	 is	 the	 transcendence	 of	 all	 misery,	 all
bondage,	all	ignorance,	all	darkness,	all	death.	You	become	part	of	eternity,	you
become	 part	 of	 god.	 You	 become	 god	 himself!	 That	 is	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 of
sannyas.	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Probably	for	four	weeks.
Good.	Four	weeks	are	enough:	three	for	three	no's.	The	next	time	come	for	four
months	and	then	for	four	years	and	then	for	forever!
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007155
ShortTitle:	GWIND15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Man	remains	a	beggar	unless	he	knows	what	the	truth	is.	And	the	truth	is	only
one.	It	is	neither	mine	nor	yours;	it	does	not	belong	to	anybody,	to	any	religion,
to	any	ideology,	to	any	church,	to	any	country,	to	any	time.	It	is	eternal,	it	is	the
very	centre	of	the	whole	existence.	It	is	also	our	centre,	everyone's	centre.	They
are	different	on	 the	 circumference,	we	are	 all	 joined	at	 the	 centre.	As	we	 start
moving	towards	the	centre	we	start	moving	towards	oneness	of	being.
First	 the	 personality	 is	 lost.	 The	 personality	 is	 a	 very	 circumferential	 thing,	 a
peripheral	 thing,	 cultivated,	 conditioned,	 taught;	 it	 is	 something	 imposed	 from
the	 outside.	 And	 when	 personality	 disappears,	 individuality	 appears.
Individuality	remains	for	the	whole	journey	between	the	circumference	and	the
centre.	 Then	 you	 enter	 the	 centre	 even	 individuality	 disappears;	 you	 become
universal.
To	reach	that	centre	is	to	be	crowned,	is	to	become	an	emperor.	That's	what	Jesus
was	talking	about	when	he	said	'I	am	a	king'	and	'Blessed	are	the	meek'	for	theirs
is	the	kingdom	of	god.'	But	he	was	totally	misunderstood.	The	woman	emperors
thought	that	he	was	trying	to	take	power	from	their	hands,	that	he	was	trying	to
make	 a	 political	 rebellion	 and	 hiding	 his	 political	 philosophy	 behind	 religious
words.	That's	why	they	conspired	with	the	rabbis,	with	the	Jews,	otherwise	they
were	not	at	all	interested	in	whether	he	was	the	messiah	or	not.	The	rabbis	were
angry	because	he	was	saying	 'I	am	the	messiah.	 I	have	come	to	deliver	people
from	their	misery.'
And	he	was	right:	every	man	who	has	attained	to	truth	is	a	messiah,	and	the	man
who	has	attained	to	truth	lives	only	to	liberate	people.	His	whole	life	is	nothing
but	 a	 sharing	 of	 his	 joy,	 he	 has	 nothing	 else	 to	 live	 for.	 All	 his	 desires	 have
disappeared;	he	has	no	motivation	of	his	own.	As	long	as	he	lives	and	breathes
he	breathes	for	all,	he	lives	for	all.
He	was	saying	absolutely	the	right	thing.	But	the	rabbis	were	angry	because	he
was	 trying	 to	 possess	 their	 religion,	 he	 was	 trying	 to	 convert	 Jews	 into	 his
followers.	And	the	Romans	were	afraid	because	he	was	talking	about	a	kingdom
and	a	crowning	and	saying	that	the	people	who	listened	to	him	and	followed	him
would	inherit	the	earth.	They	thought	he	was	a	political	person	camouflaging	his
political	philosophy	with	a	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
religious	ideology.	Hence	the	Roman	emperor	and	the	rabbis	conspired	together
to	crucify	Jesus.
But	 he	 was	 simply	 stating	 a	 fact:	 every	 man	 of	 truth	 is	 an	 emperor.	 He	 is
certainly	 crowned,	 because	 he	 reaches	 the	 ultimate	 height	 of	 glory,	 splendour,
freedom,	 blissfulness.	 That	 is	 the	 goal	 of	 sannyas	 too:	 to	 help	 you	 to	 become
emperors,	 to	help	you	 to	 attain	 the	kingdom	of	god,	 to	help	you	 to	 inherit	 the
whole	existence.
My	 sannyas	 is	 not	 for	 beggars,	my	 sannyas	 is	 for	 emperors,	 those	who	 really
want	 to	be	crowned,	 those	who	 really	want	 to	know	 the	ultimate	peak	of	bliss
and	 benediction.	 It	 is	 possible,	 and	 it	 is	 possible	 for	 everyone,	 whosoever	 is
ready	 to	 go	 on	 the	 inner	 pilgrimage,	 whosoever	 is	 ready	 first	 to	 risk	 his
personality	 to	 attain	 individuality	 and	 then	 to	 risk	 even	 individuality	 to	 attain
universality.	He	deserves	to	be	crowned!
Meditation	 is	 rest,	 absolute	 rest,	 a	 full	 stop	 to	 all	 activity	 --	 physical,	mental,
emotional.	When	you	are	in	such	a	deep	rest	that	nothing	stirs	in	you,	when	all
action	as	such	ceases,	as	if	you	are	fast	asleep	yet	awake,	you	come	to	know	who
you	 are.	 Suddenly	 the	 window	 opens.	 It	 cannot	 be	 opened	 by	 effort,	 because
effort	creates	tension	and	tension	is	the	cause	of	our	whole	misery.	Hence	this	is
something	very	fundamental	to	be	understood,,that	meditation	is	not	effort.
One	has	to	be	very	playful	about	meditation,	one	has	to	learn	to	enjoy	it	as	fun.
One	has	not	to	be	serious	about	it	--	be	serious	and	you	miss.	One	has	to	go	into
it	 very	 joyously.	And	 one	 has	 to	 keep	 aware	 that	 it	 is	 falling	 into	 deeper	 and
deeper	rest.	It	 is	not	concentration,	just	the	contrary,	it	 is	relaxation,	When	you
are	utterly	relaxed,	for	the	first	time	you	start	feeling,,your	reality,	you	come	face
to	face	with	your	being.	When	you	are	engaged	in	activity	you	are	so	occupied
that	you	cannot	see	yourself.	Activity	creates	much	smoke	round	you,	 it	 raises
much	dust	 around	you;	hence	all	 activity	has	 to	be	dropped,	 at	 least	 for	 a	 few
hours	every	day.
That	is	only	so	in	the	beginning.	When	you	have	learned	the	art	of	being	at	rest
then	you	can	be	both	active	and	restful	together,	because	then	you	know	that	rest
is	something	so	inner	that	it	cannot	be	disturbed	by	anything	outer,	 the	activity
goes	on	on	the	circumference	and	at	the	centre	you	remain	restful.	So	it	is	only
for	 beginning	 that	 activity	 has	 to	 be	 dropped	 for	 a	 few	 hours.	 Then	 one	 has
learned	the	art	then	there	is	no	question:	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day	one	can	be
meditative	and	one	can	continue	all	the	activities	of	ordinary	life.
But	 remember,	 the	 key	 word	 is	 rest,	 relaxation.	 Never	 go	 against	 rest	 and
relaxation.	 Arrange	 your	 life	 in	 such	 a	 way,	 drop	 all	 futile	 activity,	 because
ninety	per	 cent	 is	 futile;	 it	 is	 just	 for	killing	 time	and	 remaining	occupied.	Do
only	the	essential	and	devote	your	energies	more	and	more	to	the	inner	journey.
Then	that	miracle	happens	when	you	can	remain	at	 rest	and	 in	action	 together,
simultaneously.	That	is	the	meeting	of	the	sacred	and	the	mundane,	the	meeting
of	this	world	and	that,	the	meeting	of	materialism	and	spiritualism.
It	is	only	in	this	way	that	the	East	and	the	West	can	meet	and	become	one.	It	has
not	 been	 possible	 up	 to	 now	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 East	 has	 tried	 to
remain	at	rest;	hence	it	has	fallen	into	a	kind	of	inactivity.	And	the	West	has	tried
to	 remain	 active.	 The	West	 has	 completely	 forgotten	 how	 to	 be	 at	 rest;	 it	 has
become	very	feverishly	active.	Both	have	gone	wrong:	the	East	has	become	lazy
and	 lousy	 and	 the	 West	 has	 become	 insane.	 And	 activity	 out	 of	 insanity	 is
dangerous;	 the	West	 is	 driving	 the	whole	world	 towards	 that	 danger,	 the	 third
world	war.	And	inactivity,	lousiness,	lethargy,	laziness,	is	also	dangerous	--	it	is
suicidal,	it	is	a	slow	kind	of	death.	So	the	East	is	starving	and	dying,	withering
away.
The	 meeting	 of	 the	 East	 and	 the	 West	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 essential	 things	 if
humanity	 is	 to	 be	 saved.	And	my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 become	 this	meeting	 of
action	and	rest;	then	they	can	herald	the	new	man	on	earth.
A	man	who	 has	 not	 tasted	 of	 bliss	 is	 a	man	 living	 in	 dark	 night.	 He	 has	 not
known	the	morning	yet,	 the	day	has	not	happened.	He	may	have	dreamt	about
the	 sun,	 he	 may	 have	 heard	 about	 the	 sun	 in	 his	 dreams,	 he	 may	 have	 seen
paintings	of	the	sun,	but	he	has	not	yet	experienced	any	sunrise	in	himself.
Sannyas	 is	an	endeavor	 to	bring	you	out	of	your	dark	night	of	 the	soul.	Hence
the	 colour	 of	 sannyas	 is	 the	 colour	 of	 the	 rising	 sun,	 when	 the	 sky	 starts
becoming	 orange,	 goes	 red,	 all	 the	 colours	 of	 red	 and	 suddenly	 the	 sun	 starts
coming	 on	 the	 horizon.	 The	 same,	 exactly	 the	 same	 happens	 inside,	 you	 just
have	to	prepare	the	way	for	it.	The	only	blockage,	the	only	hindrance	is	the	ego.
The	whole	art	of	sannyas	consists	of	a	simple	thing	how	to	drop	the	ego.	And	it
is	not	difficult	 really	because	 it	 is	a	 false	 thing	you	have	simply	 to	understand
that	it	doesn't	exist	at	all.
To	see	that	it	doesn't	exist	is	what	I	mean	by	dropping	it.	You	cannot	really	drop
it	because	it	is	not	there	at	all	even	to	be	dropped;	it	is	just	a	false	notion,	just	an
idea	in	the	head,	just	hot	air	and	nothing	else.	A	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
little	prick	is	needed,	that	will	do;	the	balloon	bursts	and	the	hot	air	is	released.
And	 that's	my	whole	 function	here:	 to	burst	peoples'	balloons.	And	 they	 really
bring	big	balloons...
Light	is	possible,	but	only	through	love.	Without	love	only	darkness	is	possible.
In	 the	 inner	 world	 love	 and	 light	 are	 synonymous;	 they	 don't	 mean	 different
things.	 Hence	 one	 who	 wants	 to	 be	 full	 of	 light,	 one	 who	 wants	 to	 be
enlightened,	has	to	be	unconditionally	loving.
Love	without	any	demands.	Demands	make	 it	ugly,	demands	destroy	 it.	 If	you
have	some	condition	attached	to	your	love,	it	remains	no	more	love,	it	becomes
lust.	And	it	becomes	a	political	game,	a	power	trip.
Let	your	love	remain	pure	and	let	your	love	remain	unconfined;	don't	make	any
boundaries	to	it.	Let	it	remain	unaddressed,	so	slowly	slowly	it	is	not	a	question
of	whom	to	love,	what	to	love;	the	only	question	is	how	to	be	loving.	The	object
of	love	is	irrelevant.
Love	people,	 love	animals,	 love	 the	 trees,	 love	 the	 stars,	 love	yourself.	Unless
you	love	each	and	everything,	it	cannot	become	your	very	breath.	And	just	as	the
body	needs	breath	--	it	is	its	life	--	the	soul	needs	love	--	it	is	the	nourishment	for
your	 soul.	 The	 more	 you	 love,	 the	 more	 soul	 you	 have.	 When	 your	 love	 is
infinite	your	soul	also	has	infinity.	When	your	love	knows	no	bounds,	your	being
also	knows	no	bounds.	That's	what	is	really	meant	by	god-realization;	it	is	love-
realization	and	nothing	else.
Jesus	is	right	when	he	says	"God	is	love."	He	would	have	been	even	more	right
if	he	had	said	"Love	is	god."
That's	 my	whole	 effort;	 to	 put	 love	 first,	 even	 before	 god.	Why	 say,	 "God	 is
love"?	--	love	becomes	secondary.	I	say,	"Love	is	god."	Love	is	primary	--	god	is
another	name	for	it.
Man	has	tremendous	glory	hidden	in	him.	Man	is	a	splendor,	but	an	imprisoned
splendor.	That	splendor	has	to	be	released.	It	is	just	as	a	seed	keeps	thousands	of
flowers	hidden	in	it;	they	are	imprisoned	in	it.	A	gardener	is	needed	to	help	the
seed;	soil	is	needed.	And	the	seed	also	needs	a	little	courage	to	drop	its	defence,
the	 hard	 shell	 that	 surrounds	 it	 and	 protects	 it.	 Then	 immediately	 life	 starts
growing	 out	 of	 it,	 millions	 of	 leaves	 will	 come	 and	 millions	 of	 flowers	 and
millions	of	seeds	too!	In	fact	a	single	seed	has	so	much	splendor	hidden	in	it,	it
can	make	the	whole	earth	green.
And	so	is	the	case	with	a	man:	man	is	a	seed	with	thousands	of	flowers	waiting.
Meditation	is	the	method	to	release	them.	And	the	art	is	the	same	as	that	of	the
gardeners.	You	 are	 the	 seed	 and	 you	 have	 to	 be	 the	 gardener	 too;	 you	 are	 the
seed,	you	are	the	gardener,	you	have	to	be	the	soil	too.	And	you	have	to	drop	that
hard	 crust	 around	 you,	 the	 ego	 --	 and	 immediately	miracles	 become	 possible.
One	cannot	believe	it	unless	one	comes	to	know	what	is	hidden	inside.
Jesus	 is	 right	when	he	says,	"The	kingdom	of	god	 is	within	you."	People	can't
believe	 it	 because	 they	 don't	 know	 anything	 inside	 them.	 It	 is	 only	 through
meditation	that	they	will	be	able	to	experience	it.
By	becoming	a	sannyasin	you	are	taking	a	jump	--	a	jump	into	meditation.	Put	in
all	your	energies,	focus	your	whole	being	in	meditation,	and	through	meditation
all	is	possible:	even	the	impossible	is	possible.
From	the	outside	man	appears	 to	be	a	very	small	dewdrop.	But	 that	 is	only	an
appearance	 --	 don't	 be	 deceived	by	 the	 appearance.	And	 it	 is	 from	 the	 outside
that	 he	 appears	 like	 a	 dewdrop;	 if	 you	 look	 from	within	 your	 being,	 from	 the
inside,	 the	 whole	 vision	 changes.	 The	 moment	 you	 stand	 at	 your	 very	 inner
centre	and	see	yourself	from	there,	you	are	in	for	a	treat	surprise:	you	appear	to
be	 oceanic,	 as	 vast	 as	 you	 can	 imagine.	 In	 fact,	 vaster	 than	 the	 whole	 space
outside,	bigger	than	the	sky.
But	because	we	know	ourselves	only	from	the	outside	we	go	on	believing	in	our
smallness.	 And	 because	 of	 this	 feeling	 of	 smallness	 an	 inferiority	 complex
arises,	and	that	creates	millions	of	troubles	--	not	one	or	two,	but	millions.
Everybody,	 almost	 everybody,	 suffers	 from	an	 inferiority	complex.	And	 if	you
stop	 suffering	 from	 an	 inferiority	 complex,	 then	 you	 start	 suffering	 from	 a
superiority	complex	--	which	is	the	same!	All	that	you	are	doing	is	standing	on
your	head.	It	is	the	same	problem	in	reverse	order.
First	 you	 were	 starting,	 from	 ABC,	 now	 you	 are	 starting	 from	 Z	 and	 going
backwards.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 thing	whether	 you	 start	 from	A	 or	 from	Z;	 it	 is	 the
same	line,	 the	same	logic.	If	you	fail	 in	your	life	you	suffer	from	inferiority.	If
you	succeed	you	become	a	president	or	a	prime	minister,	you	start	suffering	from
a	superiority	complex.	But	the	problem	is	the	same.	Why	does	it	arise	at	all?	It
arises	because	we	don't	know	who	we	are.
We	are	oceanic:	neither	 small	nor	big,	 just	 infinite	with	no	beginning,	no	end.
That	is	our	godliness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
When	we	say,	'Man	is	a	god',	that's	precisely	what	is	meant	--	that	man	is	neither
small	nor	big;	man	is	infinite.	You	cannot	conceive	anything	about	him	through
these	words	'small'	and	'big'.	You	can	conceive	only	if	you	drop	all	these	words
totally.	 But	 that	 is	 possible	 only	 through	meditation,	 because	 you	 don't	 know
how	to	stand	at	your	centre,	how	to	be	the	centre	of	the	cyclone.
Meditation	 is	 the	 secret,	 the	 only	 secret,	 and	 the	 greatest	 secret	 that	 man	 has
discovered	 up	 to	 now.	 The	 theory	 of	 atomic	 energy	 is	 not	 the	 greatest	 secret,
neither	 the	 theory	of	gravitation,	nor	 the	 theory	of	Einsteinian	 relativity.	These
are	nothing	compared	to	the	insight	that	man	has	discovered	through	meditation.
Buddha,	Christ,	Zarathustra,	Lao	Tzu	--	all	these	people	have	come	to	know	only
one	thing:	a	simple	art	of	going	to	your	very	centre	and	seeing	the	world	from
there...	Because	the	perspective	is	totally	different.
Your	whole	world	becomes	different,	it	is	no	more	the	same	world.	In	one	sense
everything	 remains	 the	 same	 and	 in	 another	 sense	 nothing	 is	 the	 same.	 It
becomes	 such	 a	 beautiful	 experience,	 such	 an	 ecstasy	 that	 words	 are	 not
adequate	 to	 express	 it,	 even	 poetry	 falls	 short,	 even	 music	 falls	 short,	 even
dancing	cannot	become	a	real	indication	of	it.	There	is	no	way	to	make	a	gesture
about	it.
Each	one	has	to	know	it.	The	only	way	to	know	it	is	to	know	it.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007165
ShortTitle:	GWIND16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	revolution	begins	with	bliss.	One	cannot	grow	in	sadness,	in	misery;	one	can
grow	only	 in	 blissfulness,	 because	when	one	 is	miserable	 the	being	 shrinks,	 it
closes.	 That's	 a	 natural	 phenomenon,	 and	 everybody	 knows	 about	 it	 because
everybody	has	felt	 it.	It	 is	factual,	 it	 is	not	a	theory:	whenever	you	are	sad	you
become	closed	--	all	windows,	all	doors	are	closed.	You	want	to	be	cut	off	from
everything	 and	 everybody.	Growth	 becomes	 impossible	 because	 growth	 needs
opening.
In	bliss	one	opens	up.	All	the	doors	and	all	the	windows	are	thrown	open.	You
are	 available	 to	 the	wind,	 to	 the	 rain,	 to	 the	 sun,	 to	 existence.	 In	 that	meeting
with	existence	growth	happens.	Hence	blissfulness	has	to	be	the	first	step,	only
then	is	there	a	possibility	of	prayer.
People	pray	out	of	their	misery.	They	pray	because	they	are	miserable,	and	they
think	through	prayer	they	will	be	able	to	get	out	of	misery.	At	the	most	that	kind
of	prayer	can	help	to	console	them,	but	it	cannot	help	them	to	get	out	of	misery.
They	will	become	settled	and	adjusted	to	their	misery	--	that	is	really	dangerous.
The	so-called	religion	works	in	that	way:	it	helps	you	to	become	adjusted	to	all
kinds	of	misery.
That's	why	in	the	East	you	will	see	people	living	in	all	kinds	of	miseries	without
any	rebellion,	without	any	effort	 to	improve	their	life.	It	 is	because	of	their	so-
called	 religiousness;	 they	 have	 become	 adjusted	 to	 everything,	 they	 have
forgotten	completely	that	life	can	be	different.	They	have	accepted	life	as	it	is.
This	 is	 not	 a	 good	 situation:	 it	 stops	 evolution.	 Hence	 I	 never	 suggest	 prayer
when	one	is	in	misery.
Prayer	should	be	only	when	you	are	cheerful,	blissful	when	you	can	dance	and
sing,	when	you	can	rejoice.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Then	prayer	is	a	tremendous	leap	into	the	unknown	because	it	helps	you	to	trust
existence.	Prayer	is	trust.	It	is	a	love	affair	with	the	whole,	a	love	affair	with	the
trees	and	the	stars	and	the	mountains	and	all	that	is.
Prayer	means	you	are	feeling	so	thankful	to	everything	that	is	that	you	are	ready
to	bless	it	because	you	feel	the	blessing	of	it	all	showering	on	you.	Then	prayer
is	 gratitude,	 gratefulness,	 thankfulness,	 a	 heartfelt	 thank	 you	 to	 the	 whole,
unaddressed	 to	anybody,	not	even	 to	god	 in	particular.	A	 real	prayer	 is	 always
unaddressed.	 It	 is	 a	 sheer	 utterance	 of	 joy,	 a	 shout	 of	 joy;	 it	 need	 not	 be
addressed.
Whenever	 a	 prayer	 is	 addressed,	 it	 is	 not	 real	 prayer:	 it	 is	 Christian,	 Hindu,
Mohammedan,	but	it	is	not	prayer.	It	is	prescribed	by	the	state,	by	the	church,	by
the	people	who	have	a	vested	interest	and	who	want	you	to	adjust	according	to
them.	It	is	an	imposition	from	those	who	are	powerful	--	the	politicians	and	the
priests.	It	is	a	conspiracy	against	every	individual	and	his	freedom.
Real	prayer	has	no	adjective	to	it;	it	cannot	be	Hindu,	Mohammedan,	Christian.
It	 is	 simply	a	 thankfulness.	 It	need	not	even	be	said.	 It	 is	a	deep	 feeling;	your
very	being	is	full	of	it,	overflowing	with	it.
That	overflowing	thankfulness	becomes	your	fragrance.
Prayer	 is	 like	a	 flower.	Bliss	 is	 like	 the	spring	when	 the	flowers	open	up.	And
when	the	flowers	open	there	is	fragrance;	 the	imprisoned	fragrance	is	released.
When	 prayer	 starts	 overflowing	with	 no	 effort,	 naturally,	 spontaneously,	when
you	are	just	thankful	--	for	no	particular	reason	at	all,	just	to	be	is	enough,	just	to
exist	for	a	single	moment	is	enough...
To	attain	to	that	fragrance	is	to	come	to	the	peak	of	your	life,	to	the	crescendo.
There	is	fulfillment	and	tremendous	contentment.	One	has	arrived	home.
All	 glory	 is	 of	 god.	 If	 our	 life	 is	 missing	 it,	 it	 is	 because	 of	 our	 ego.	 Ego	 is
something	ugly,	it	is	a	monster.	It	is	like	an	octopus	that	surrounds	you	from	all
sides;	 it	 is	 a	 parasite.	 It	 goes	 on	 and	 on	 exploiting	 all	 possibilities	 of	 being
glorious,	all	possibilities	of	attaining	dignity	and	grace,	and	it	goes	on	creating
all	kinds	of	ugly	attitudes,	motives.	Greed	comes	out	of	it,	anger	comes	out	of	it,
hatred	comes	out	of	 it,	violence	comes	out	of	 it,	 jealousy	comes	out	of	 it	 --	all
kinds	of	power	trips	trying	to	dominate	people.
The	whole	politics	of	life	arise	out	of	this	single	source.	It	poisons	your	life,	 it
poisons	other	people's	life...	but	we	go	on	carrying	it.	And	then	we	are	puzzled
again	and	again:	why	is	our	life	missing	the	splendour	Jesus	talks	about,	Buddha
talks	about,	Zarathustra	talks	about?	Where	is	the	kingdom	of	god?	All	that	we
see	is	evil,	within	and	without;	we	don't	see	anything	which	can	really	be	called
divine.	Everything	seems	to	be	devilish.
The	whole	of	life	is	crippled	and	paralysed	by	a	single	poison,	the	ego.	It	is	very
destructive,	it	destroys	others,	and	it	is	self-destructive	too,	because	you	cannot
destroy	others	unless	you	destroy	yourself.	 It	 is	 impossible	 to	be	murderous	 if
you	 are	 not	 suicidal	 --	 those	 things	 go	 together.	 Only	 a	 suicidal	 person	 is
murderous.	 In	 fact	 he	 is	 trying	 to	 murder	 just	 to	 avoid	 suicide.	 If	 he	 cannot
murder	he	will	commit	suicide.
Adolf	 Hitler	 tried	 to	 commit	 suicide	 many	 times	 when	 he	 was	 young.	 Small
things	...	and	he	would	think	of	suicide.	He	could	not	get	into	art	school	and	he
thought	to	commit	suicide,	then	what	is	the	meaning	of	life?	Then	he	wanted	to
become	an	architect	and	he	could	not	--	again,	the	idea	of	suicide.
To	avoid	it	he	entered	the	army,	he	became	murderous,	and	then	he	succeeded	in
being	 the	 greatest	murderer	 in	 the	whole	 of	 human	 history.	And	 ultimately	 he
committed	 suicide.	 When	 he	 could	 not	 murder	 any	 more,	 when	 he	 saw	 that
everything	that	he	had	made	was	crumbling	down,	that	now	there	was	no	more
possibility	 of	 his	 being	 victorious	 and	 a	world-conqueror,	 that	 he	 had	 lost	 the
war,	when	he	saw	the	enemy	forces	entering	Berlin	the	only	thing	that	came	to
his	mind	was	suicide,	he	committed	suicide.
Many	psychologists	have	been	puzzled	by	it	because	their	idea	is	that	a	suicidal
person	 and	 a	 murderous	 person	 are	 opposites	 --	 that's	 not	 true.	 They	 appear
opposites	 but	 they	 are	 not	 opposites.	 It	 is	 the	 same	mind	which	moves	 like	 a
pendulum	between	two	polar	opposites.	But	it	is	the	same	mind	which	goes	from
the	left	to	the	right,	from	the	right	to	the	left.	It	moves	between	two	extremes.
This	fundamental	thing	is	still	missing	in	modern	psychology.	They	still	think	in
terms	of	opposites.
They	have	not	been	able	 to	 see	 that	opposites	meet	 somewhere	and	are	 joined
together	 and	 are	 not	 real	 opposites,	 only	 apparent	 opposites	 --	 basically
complementary,	not	contradictory.
Any	 moment	 the	 suicidal	 person	 can	 become	 murderous,	 and	 any	 moment
suicidal;	but	it	is	the	same	ego,	the	same	pendulum	that	moves.	It	never	stops	in
the	middle	because	to	stop	in	the	middle	means	death	of	the	ego.	Hence	all	the
great	 masters	 of	 the	 world	 have	 talked	 about	 the	 golden	 means	 stop	 in	 the
middle.
Buddha	has	called	his	path	the	middle	way,	majjhim	nikaya.	He	says	if	you	can
avoid	the	extremes	then	there	is	nothing	else	to	be	done,	just	avoid	the	extremes
absolutely	and	remain	in	the	exact	middle	and	you	will	be	able	to	transcend	all
problems	 of	 life.	Don't	 be	murderous,	 don't	 be	 suicidal,	 neither	 be	 this	 nor	 be
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
that;	 just	 begin	 in	 the	 middle,	 and	 in	 the	 middle	 the	 ego	 dies.	 The	 ego	 lives
through	extremes.
So	there	are	worldly	people	--	that	is	one	extreme;	then	there	are	other-worldly
people	 --	 that	 is	 another	 extreme.	 There	 are	 people	 who	 are	 after	money	 and
there	are	people	who	have	 renounced	money.	These	are	extremes,	 the	ways	of
the	 ego.	 A	 few	 people	 live	 in	 the	 market,	 their	 whole	 life	 is	 devoted	 to	 the
marketplace,	 and	 a	 few	 escape	 to	 the	monasteries.	 They	 are	 the	 same	 people,
apparently	looking	very	opposite	but	they	are	not	opposite	people.	They	belong
to	the	same	spectrum,	the	same	mind;	the	same	ego	moving	from	one	extreme	to
the	other.
My	 sannyas	means	 being	 exactly	 in	 the	middle.	 And	 that	 is	 the	 whole	 art	 of
attaining	 to	 divine	 glory,	 because	 in	 the	 middle	 is	 transcendence	 from	 all
problems.	Just	as	if	when	you	stop	the	pendulum	in	the	middle	the	clock	stops,
stop	the	ego	in	the	middle	and	the	whole	mechanism	of	the	ego	--	-the	mind	--
stops,	the	whole	clock	stops.	Suddenly	you	transcend	time,	mind,	you	enter	into
eternity.	And	there	is	the	glory	and	the	splendour.
All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 a	 tremendous	 awareness	 of	 extremes	 and	 the	 attraction
between	the	extremes.	And	avoiding	that	attraction	is	the	only	path.
Meditation	 is	not	something	added	 to	you,	 it	 is	 just	 the	explosion	of	your	self-
nature.	 It	 is	 already	 there	 in	 the	 seed	 form,	 so	 it	 is	 not	 an	 achievement.	 You
already	have	it	--	all	that	is	needed	is	a	little	exploration:
'Where	is	it?'	But	we	have	never	explored	our	inner	beings.
Man	is	a	strange	animal,	he	explores	everything	--	he	will	go	to	Everest,	he	will
go	to	the	North	Pole	and	the	South	Pole	and	he	will	go	to	the	moon	--	but	he	will
never	 think	 of	 going	 within	 himself.	 That	 is	 the	 greatest	 disease	 man	 suffers
from.
The	only	space	that	he	leaves	unexplored	is	his	own	inner	world	--	and	the	real
treasure	is	there.	And	unless	one	enters	into	the	shrine	of	one's	own	being	one's
life	 is	 just	 a	 wastage,	 a	 wastage	 which	 is	 inestimable.	 We	 are	 losing	 such	 a
golden	 opportunity	 but	 we	 are	 not	 even	 aware	 that	 we	 are	 losing	 the	 golden
opportunity.	 We	 are	 so	 unconscious	 that	 we	 go	 on	 throwing	 away	 all	 that	 is
precious	and	we	go	on	collecting	junk.
People	 collect	 every	 kind	 of	 junk.	 Even	 when	 they	 become	 old	 they	 are	 so
childish,	 collecting	 old	 postal	 stamps	 ...	 or	 collecting	 just	 any	 kind	 of	 ancient
junk,	 anything	 that	 experts	 say	 is	 antique.	 And	 the	 things	 that	 are	 known	 as
antique	in	the	world,	ninety-nine	por	cent	of	them	are	not	antique	at	all;	they	are
manufactured,	they	are	very	modern.
One	 of	 my	 friends	 runs	 a	 factory	 in	 Nepal	 which	 manufactures	 antiques	 --
ancient	 Buddhas,	 fifteen	 hundred	 years	 old,	 seventeen	 hundred	 years	 old...	 I
asked	him	'How	do	you	create	them?'	He	showed	me	his	factory.	First	the	statue
has	to	be	created	then	an	inscription	is	made	in	the	language	of	those	days.	Then
the	inscription	has	to	be	rubbed	off	so	a	few	words	are	missing,	and	then	acid	has
to	be	poured	onto	the	statue.
Then	the	statue	has	to	be	put	deep	into	the	earth	for	at	least	six	to	nine	months.	A
few	of	 its	 limbs	have	to	be	broken	--	 the	nose	may	be	missing,	an	eye	may	be
missing	 --	 and	 then	a	 simply	ordinary	 statue	becomes	antique,	 and	 suddenly	 it
becomes	very	precious!
If	it	were	modern	it	would	have	been	just	three	hundred,	four	hundred	rupees	at
the	most.	But	when	it	becomes	antique	after	six	months	of	all	kinds	of	treatment,
then	it	collects	thousands	of	dollars.
People	are	just	mad!	And	this	is	something	that	gives	an	indication	of	their	mind.
There	are	people	who	will	go	on	collecting	old	scriptures;	the	older	they	are,	the
better	 they	 are	 thought	 to	 be.	 Here	 are	 money-collectors,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of
stupidities	 go	 on.	Man	 has	 infinite	 greed	 and	 nothing	 satisfies	 him.	 It	 cannot
satisfy	him	because	the	real	search	which	can	satisfy	never	begins.
He	is	really	searching	for	his	own	ancientmost	treasure,	but	searching	in	a	wrong
direction.	 Going	 to	 Everest	 he	 is	 really	 trying	 to	 find	 the	 highest	 peak	 of
consciousness,	but	his	whole	effort	is	misplaced.
Going	to	the	moon	is	really	symbolic:	he	wants	to	explore	his	own	moon	energy,
his	own	silent	energy;	 the	moon	 represents	 silence,	peace,	 the	 feminine	 inside.
But	rather	than	going	there	he	will	go	to	the	moon,	All	these	efforts	are	doomed
to	fail.	But	before	one	effort	fails,	we	have	already	planned	another,	and	in	this
way	we	go	on	moving	from	one	failure	to	another	failure.	Death	simply	closes	a
long	series	of	failures.
Even	those	people	who	we	think	are	successful	people	are	not	really	successful
people.	 Even	Alexander	 the	Great	 or	 Napoleon	 or	 Ivan	 the	 Terrible,	 all	 these
people	who	have	made	great	conquests,	deep	down	are	very	miserable	because
they	 know	 perfectly	 well	 that	 death	 is	 approaching	 and	 all	 that	 they	 have
gathered	 is	bound	 to	be	 taken	away,	 so	what	 is	 the	point	of	 it	 all?	 It	 is	 simply
pointless.
The	only	treasure	worth	searching	for	is	your	own	nature.	The	real	adventure	is
to	go	within	yourself.
And	 that's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about.	 Once	 it	 becomes	 your	 commitment	 --	 a
deliberate,	conscious	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
commitment,	 a	 decision	 that	 whatsoever	 happens	 I	 have	 to	 find	 myself,	 my
nature,	my	being,	'that	I	am	not	going	to	miss	this	opportunity	of	life'...	once	this
decision	is	clearly	there	and	your	energies	start	pouring	into	it,	there	is	no	reason
why	one	 should	 fail.	Nobody	 has	 ever	 failed.	Whosoever	 has	 put	 his	 energies
into	the	inner	search	has	always	found	himself.
So	let	your	initiation	into	sannyas	be	a	great	decision,	the	greatest	of	your	life.
From	 this	 moment	 onwards	 withdraw	 your	 energies	 from	 all	 that	 is	 non-
essential.	Yes,	the	essential	has	to	be	done	and	fulfilled,	but	that	is	not	much.	It	is
the	 non-essential	 that	 destroys	 life.	 Withdraw	 your	 energies	 from	 the	 non-
essential	and	put	that	energy	into	the	inner	search.	And	it	is	a	promise	that	once
you	go	 totally	 into	 it	 there	 is	 no	 reason	why	one	 should	 fail;	 nobody	has	 ever
failed.	Without	 any	 exception,	 those	who	 have	 entered	 inwards	with	 intensity,
with	 passion,	 have	 always	 reached	 to	 their	 innermost	 core.	 And	 there,	 light
explodes.	One	 suddenly	 comes	 to	know	 that	 this	 is	what	 life	 is	 for,	 this	 is	 the
meaning	of	life.
Meditation	 is	 the	only	possibility	of	knowing	 that	you	are	deathless.	The	body
dies	but	not	you,	the	body	is	born	but	not	you.	You	have	been	before	birth	and
you	will	be	there	after	death.	Hence	life	is	not	just	an	episode	between	birth	and
death,	 on	 the	 contrary,	 there	 are	many	 births	 and	many	 deaths	 in	 a	 long,	 long
eternity	 of	 life.	 Birth	 and	 death	 are	 just	 small	 events,	 just	 like	 bubbles	 in	 the
river,	waves	which	come	and	go,	but	the	river	remains	...	and	the	river	goes	on
and	on.
Unless	 this	becomes	your	experience	one	cannot	 live	 life	 joyously	because	 the
fear	of	death	contaminated	everything.	We	may	not	be	conscious	of	 it	but	 it	 is
always	there	like	a	shadow	following	us.
We	may	not	think	about	it	at	all,	in	fact	we	don't	want	to	think	about	it	--	people
avoid	 the	subject	of	death	as	much	as	 they	can.	Even	 if	 it	comes	up	 in	certain
situations,	 they	 change	 the	 subject	 as	 quickly	 as	 possible;	 nobody	 wants	 to
discuss	it,
There	have	been	only	two	taboos	in	 the	world,	sex	and	death.	Don't	 talk	about
sex	because	sex	is	bound	to	bring	up	the	question	of	death	sooner	or	later.	And
the	 second	 taboo	 is	 death.	 Don't	 talk	 about	 it,	 because	 people	 start	 becoming
afraid,	they	know	that	it	concerns	them	and	they	escaping	it	in	many	ways.	Even
the	word	 'death'	 is	not	used.	When	somebody	dies	we	have	beautiful	words	 to
describe	it:	'He	has	become	a	beloved	of	god.'	We	will	not	say	that	'He	has	died'
but	'He	has	become	a	beloved	of	god',	'He	has	gone	to	the	other	shore.'
We	have	expressions	in	every	language	to	avoid	the	word	'death',	but	whatsoever
we	do,	it	is	there.	And	everybody	knows	that	it	is	there.	From	the	very	moment	a
child	 is	 born	 death	 follows	 him.	 Every	 day	 it	 is	 with	 you,	 and	 one	 has	 to
encounter	it,	and	one	has	to	see	it	face	to	face	and	one	has	to	come	to	terms	with
it.
The	only	way	is	meditation.	Meditation	means	becoming	aware	of	 'Who	am	I?
Am	I	the	body	or	the	mind	or	am	I	something	more,	something	different?'
Meditation	moans	becoming	aware	inside	your	being,	becoming	alert,	watchful,
witnessing.	And	then	those	things	are	very	simple:	you	can	see	that	you	are	not
the	body,	because	one	day	the	body	was	a	small	child,	 then	it	became	a	young
person,	 then	 it	 became	old	 --	 and	you	are	 the	 same.	The	body	has	been	going
through	a	thousand	and	one	changes	and	you	are	exactly	the	same,	nothing	has
happened	to	you.	That's	why	if	you	close	your	eyes	you	cannot	exactly	say	how
old	you	are.	 It	 is	 in	 looking	 in	 the	mirror	 that	you	become	aware	 that	you	are
becoming	old,'	otherwise	with	closed	eyes	you	cannot	feel	any	age.	Nobody	can
feel	 it,	 nobody	 can	 see	 any	 change	 inside;	 consciousness	 remains	 unchanging.
'Hence	the	changing	is	not	me	and	cannot	be	me.'
And	 the	mind	 is	 even	more	 changing	 than	 the	 body.	 Even	 the	 body	 stays	 the
same	 for	 a	 few	 days,	 a	 few	 months,	 even	 a	 few	 years,	 but	 the	 mind	 is	 very
momentary.	One	moment	there	is	anger,	another	moment	there	is	no	anger,	one
moment	 there	 is	 sadness,	 another	 moment	 there	 is	 joy	 --	 it	 is	 continuously
changing.
You	are	a	witness	of	it	all,	and	the	watcher	cannot	be	the	watched.	You	are	the
subject	and	all	these	things	are	the	objects.
As	 this	 becomes	 your	 deep	 experience	 a	 realisation,	 a	 great	 freedom	 arises	 in
you.	The	body	is	there	and	it	has	to	be	used;	it	is	a	beautiful	house	to	live	in.	The
mind	is	 there	and	it	has	to	be	used;	 it	 is	one	of	 the	most	beautiful	mechanisms
given	by	nature	 to	you	--	use	 it	 to	 its	 fullest	capacity.	But	 remember,	don't	get
identified	with	any,	neither	 the	body	nor	 the	mind.	Remaining	unidentified	one
becomes	aware	of	eternity,	of	deathlessness.	That	is	amrit,	that	is	nectar.	To	taste
it,	even	just	a	drop	of	it,	is	enough	and	your	whole	life	takes	on	a	totally	different
perspective,	a	different	vision.	Suddenly	you	are	transported.	men	you	live	in	the
same	world	yet	you	are	no	more	the	same.
That's	what	 sannyas	 is:	being	 in	 the	world	yet	being	 in	such	a	 totally	different
way.	Being	 in	 the	world	as	a	witness	 --	 that	defines	sannyas	precisely.	 In	your
remaining	unidentified	with	everything	that	goes	on,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
remaining	centred	in	your	consciousness,	unwaveringly	centred,	slowly	slowly	it
becomes	a	crystallised	phenomenon.	Then	even	when	death	really	happens	you
will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 it	 happening.	 You	 will	 be	 able	 to	 see	 that	 the	 body	 is
dropping;	just	like	a	dead	leaf	dropping	from	the	tree,	the	body	is	dropping	from
you.
The	 greatest	 experience	 of	 life	 is	 to	 see	 death	 clearly,	 alert,	 aware.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	experience,	because	one	who	can	see	it	happening	is	never	born	in	the
body	again.	Then	he	becomes	part	of	 the	eternal	 flow	of	consciousness,	of	 the
universal	consciousness,	then	he	becomes	part	of	god.
Unless	this	experience	happens	you	will	have	to	come	back	again	and	again	into
the	body.	The	body	is	just	like	a	school:	if	you	fail	you	have	to	go	back;	if	you
pass	then	there	is	no	need	to	go	back.
My	observation	 is	 that	 everyone	 can	pass	 in	 this	 experience,	 everyone	has	 the
potential,	we	just	never	try	to	actualise	it.	Now	this	has	to	be	your	goal.
A	man	who	 has	 never	 known	meditation	 goes	 on	 thinking	 about	 himself	 as	 a
very	small	phenomenon.
From	the	outside	man	looks	very	small	--	the	body	is	a	small	thing,	compared	to
the	earth	it	 is	so	small.	The	earth	itself	compared	to	the	sun	is	very	small.	The
sun	is	sixty	thousand	times	bigger	than	the	earth,	so	compared	to	the	sun	we	are
just	 like	such	small	dust	particles,	almost	 invisible.	But	 the	sun	 is	not	very	big
really.	There	are	stars	with	which	in	comparison	this	sun	is	just	a	dust	particle.
So	what	are	we	as	far	as	the	body	is	concerned?	--	so	small	that	it	is	impossible
even	 to	 conceive	 that	 things	 can	 be	 smaller	 than	 we	 are.	We	 are	 almost	 like
electrons:	invisible,	just	hypothetical,	nobody	has	seen	them.
There	 is	 a	 beautiful	 story	written	 by	Bertrand	Russell	 --	 he	 has	written	 a	 few
stories,	and	when	a	man	like	Bertrand	Russell	writes	a	story	it	is	not	an	ordinary
story.
A	 great	 theologian	 dies,	 and	 of	 course	 in	 his	 heart	 he	 thinks	 that	 he	 will	 be
welcomed	by	god.	He	reaches	 the	doors	of	heaven	but	he	 is	very	shocked:	 the
door	is	so	big,	he	cannot	completely	see	where	it	ends.	He	goes	on	knocking	and
knocking	 and	 he	 feels,	 'On	 such	 a	 vast	 door	 --	 I	 cannot	 see	where	 it	 starts	 or
where	it	ends	--	my	knocks	are	like	a	small	ant	knocking	on	the	church	door.'
Millions	 of	 years	 pass,	 then	 a	 janitor	 opens	 a	 window	 in	 the	 door	 and	 looks
down.	He	searches	very	carefully	to	see	who	is	knocking	at	the	door	and	then	he
finds	 this	 tiny	 theologian.	 The	 theologian	 thinks	 he	 is	 god,	 and	 he	 says,	 'My
father,	have	you	recognised	me	or	not?'	But	he	is	very	afraid	whether	or	not	his
voice	can	be	heard	by	this	man	--	he	 is	so	far	away.	He	shouts	as	 loudly	as	he
can.
The	janitor	says,	'Excuse	me	--	I	am	not	god	the	father,	I	am	just	the	janitor.	As
far	as	god	the	father	is	concerned,	I	have	not	seen	him.	He	is	so	big	and	I	am	so
tiny	in	comparison	to	him,	I	have	not	seen	him	yet.
I	have	not	even	seen	anybody	who	has	seen	him,	because	the	people	who	have
seen	him	are	very	big.	They	have	millions	of	eyes.'
'I	ask	admission'	said	the	theologian,	because	I	am	a	good	man	and	devoted	my
life	to	the	glory	of	god.'
'Man?'	 said	 the	 janitor.	 'What	 is	 that?	And	how	could	such	a	 funny	creature	as
you	do	anything	to	promote	the	glory	of	god?'
The	theologian	is	astonished.	'You	can't	be	ignorant	of	man.	You	must	be	aware
that	man	is	the	supreme	work	of	the	creator.'
'I	am	sorry	to	hurt	your	feelings,'	said	the	janitor,	'but	what	you're	saying	is	news
to	me.	However,	since	you	seem	distressed	you	shall	have	a	chance	of	consulting
our	librarian.'
The	librarian	is	huge,	like	a	mountain,	and	has	ten	thousand	eyes.	'This,'	says	the
janitor,	 'says	that	 it	 is	a	member	of	a	species	called	man	which	lives	in	a	place
called	earth.	It	has	some	odd	notion	that	the	creator	takes	special	interest	in	this
place	and	this	species.'
'Perhaps	 you	 can	 tell	 me	 where	 this	 place	 is	 that	 you	 call	 earth,'	 says	 the
librarian.
'It	is	part	of	the	solar	system'	says	the	theologian.	'And	what	is	the	solar	system?'
asks	 the	 librarian.	 'The	 solar	 system	 is	 part	 of	 the	 Milky	 Way'	 says	 the
theologian.	'And	what	is	the	Milky	Way?'	asks	the	librarian.
'The	Milky	Way	is	one	of	the	galaxies'	replies	the	theologian.
The	theologian	was	losing	all	hope.	He	thought	he	would	be	welcomed	and	god
himself	 would	 be	 waiting	 at	 the	 door.	 More	 inquiries	 are	 made	 and	 a	 clerk
concerned	with	the	galaxies	is	called	in.	Several	years	later	he	returns	with	more
information	about	this	particular	galaxy.	At	this	point	it	is	all	such	a	shock	to	the
theologian	that	he	wakes	up.	He	had	not	really	died,	he	was	dreaming.	He	wakes
up,	 he	 is	 completely	 perspiring,	 and	 from	 that	 day	 he	 forgets	 all	 about	 his
religion.	That	 dream	 shattered	 all	 his	 religion,	 his	 spirituality.	Now	he	 knows,
'All	 that	 is	 nonsense,	my	 own	 creation,	my	 own	 imagination.'	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful
story....
Man	is	very	small,	but	only	from	the	oustide.	If	you	look	at	man	from	the	inside,
he	is	as	vast	as	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
whole	 existence	 itself.	 But	 we	 have	 never	 looked	 from	 the	 inside,	 that's	 why
everybody	suffers	from	some	kind	of	inferiority	complex.
Meditation	 frees	 you	 from	 an	 inferiority	 complex.	And	 except	 for	meditation,
nothing	 can	 make	 you	 free	 from	 an	 inferiority	 complex,	 no	 psychological
analysis	 can	 help.	 At	 the	 most	 psychologists	 can	 help	 you	 to	 create	 another
fiction	 --	 that	 is	 the	superiority	complex.	But	 it	 is	as	 stupid	as	 the	 first	one,	 in
fact	more	stupid	 than	 the	 first	one.	The	 first	one	has	some	reality	about	 it;	 the
superiority	complex	is	simply	fiction,	pure	fiction.
A	meditator	 neither	 feels	 inferior	 nor	 superior,	 he	 simply	 feels	 he	 is	 no	more,
only	 the	 vast	 existence	 is,	 the	 whole	 space	 is.	 He	 becomes	 part	 of	 it,	 he	 is
immersed	in	it,	he	becomes	oceanic.	And	to	feel	that	vastness	is	the	greatest	bliss
in	life.	It	is	also	freedom	from	fear,	it	is	also	the	ultimate	truth.
So	put	all	your	energies	into	meditation,	into	awareness,	so	that	you	are	able	to
look	at	yourself	from	the	inside.	Meditation	is	the	mirror,,the	real	mirror	which
will	give	you	your	original	face.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007175
ShortTitle:	GWIND17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Mind	lives	in	doubt.	Doubt	is	the	climate	which	is	absolutely	necessary	for	the
mind	to	exist.	In	the	same	way	trust	is	the	climate	in	which	the	heart	grows;	they
are	 polar	 opposites.	 If	 one	 wants	 to	 live	 in	 the	 mind	 then	 one	 has	 to	 go	 on
increasing	one's	doubt.	Then	the	whole	effort	should	be	how	to	sharpen	doubt,
how	to	make	it	absolute	so	that	there	is	no	way	to	come	to	any	conclusion.
Science	 depends	 on	 doubt	 because	 science	 is	 a	 project	 of	 the	 mind;	 hence
science	 never	 comes	 to	 any	 conclusions.	At	 the	most	 it	 comes	 to	 hypothetical
conclusions.	And	whenever	a	conclusion	 is	hypothetical	 it	 is	not	conclusive.	 It
simply	means	 for	 the	 time	being	we	will	 sharpen	our	doubt	more	and	 then	we
will	 have	 to	 change	 it.	 So	 science	 is	 always	 approximately	 true,	 never	 exactly
true.	It	cannot	claim	truth	--	that	is	not	its	territory.
Religion	is	just	the	opposite	of	it:	it	functions	through	trust,	faith.	It	is	a	totally
different	 approach	 towards	 life.	 It	 is	 an	 approach	 through	 love.	 That's	 why
religion	comes	to	conclusions	and	it	helps	a	person	to	become	centred,	to	relax,
to	 rest.	With	 a	 hypothesis	 you	 can	 never	 rest,	 you	 can	 never	 be	 at	 ease.	 You
know	that	it	is	only	a	hypothesis,	tomorrow	it	is	going	to	be	changed	--	how	can
you	make	your	home	on	such	shifting	sands?
Science	 can	 never	 be	 a	 shelter	 for	 man.	 It	 can	 give	 you	 more	 comfort,
convenience,	a	better	standard	of	living,	but	it	cannot	give	you	a	better	quality	of
life	--	that	is	impossible.	That	can	happen	only	through	religion,	because	it	helps
you	to	feel	at	home,	it	gives	you	something	certain	to	live	for.	It	gives	you	a	rock
to	build	your	temple	upon	--	and	that	rock	is	trust.
As	your	trust	grows,	your	bliss	grows;	as	your	doubt	grows,	your	tension	grows,
misery	 grows.	 Doubt	 ultimately	 ends	 in	 anguish	 and	 anxiety.	 That's	 why	 the
scientific	approach	is	bound	to	drive	people	crazy;	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	driving	the	whole	world	crazy.	And	remember:	I	am	not	against	science	at	all,
but	I	would	like	man	first	to	be	centred	in	the	heart	and	then	to	use	science	as	a
means.	It	can	never	be	the	goal,	 it	can	never	be	the	end.	It	can	only	be	a	good
servant,	never	the	master.
Love	has	 to	be	 the	master,	doubt	has	 to	be	 its	servant,	 then	everything	is	 in	 its
right	place.	Otherwise	doubt	becomes	the	master	and	it	starts	encroaching	upon
the	 territory	 of	 love	 and	 trust	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 destroying	 everything.	 It	 is	 like
cancer	if	it	becomes	a	master.	It	has	to	be	put	in	its	place.
I	am	not	against	it,	it	has	to	be	used.	Science	has	to	be	used	for	human	comforts,
convenience.	It	can	give	many	benefits	to	humanity.	But	it	never	be	enshrined	as
a	god.	That	is	not	its	business	but	that's	what	science	has	been	pretending	to	do.
That's	 why	 the	 whole	 of	 humanity	 feels	 is	 a	 desertlike	 situation	 where	 all
meaning	has	been	lost,	he	has	become	insignificant,	worthless.	At	the	most	you
can	drag,	but	you	cannot	dance.
Through	trust	comes	dance,	celebration,	bliss,	benediction.
Sannyas	means	a	change,	a	 radical	change	 from	the	heard	 to	 the	heart,	a	 jump
from	logic	to	love.
Just	as	the	farmer	has	to	work	with	the	seeds	and	the	soil	and	the	water	and	the
sun,	 a	 sannyasin	 also	 has	 to	 work	 in	 the	 same	 way	 in	 the	 inner	 world.	 His
interiority,	 his	 subjectivity,	 is	 his	 field,	 his	 farm.	 He	 has	 to	 sow	 seeds	 of
meditation,	of	awareness,	of	consciousness.	And	he	has	to	work	hard.	He	has	to
work	hard,	only	then	one	day	can	those	seeds	start	growing	and	one	see	the	inner
world	flowering	and	becoming	fruitful.
Ordinarily	man's	inner	world	remains	a	desert.	It	can	become	a	beautiful	garden.
All	 that	 is	 needed	 to	 make	 it	 a	 garden	 is	 provided	 at	 your	 birth;	 all	 that	 is
necessary	is	given	to	you.	It	if	you	keep	the	seeds	locked	in	a	treasure	box	they
don't	become	flowers.	If	you	never	take	any	care	of	the	inner,	if	you	never	look
at	the	inner,	nothing	is	going	to	happen	there.	Attention	is	needed.
It	has	been	found	recently	that	attention	is	one	of	the	most	important	ingredients
for	any	kind	of	growth,	outer	or	inner.	A	child	needs	the	mother's	milk,	but	even
more	 than	 that	 he	 needs	 the	 mother's	 attention.	 If	 the	 mother	 only	 gives	 him
nourishment	 for	 the	body	 and	 takes	no	other	 care,	 if	 the	 child	 feels	 neglected,
ignored,	his	growth	is	stopped.	He	loses	trust	in	himself,	he	loses	confidence,	he
loses	the	very	purpose	of	life.	He	starts	feeling	he	is	useless,	he	is	not	needed.	To
be	needed	is	 the	greatest	need.	Without	it,	without	its	cosy	atmosphere	nothing
can	grow.
They	have	found	that	even	with	plants...	you	can	put	two	plants	of	the	same	size
int	he	same	soil	you	can	give	them	the	same	nourishment	--	manure,	chemicals,
everything	--	with	no	difference	except	one:	with	one	plant	be	loving	and	very
caring,	and	with	the	other	just	be	a	nurse.
With	one	be	a	mother,	with	the	other	just	be	a	nurse:	give	all	that	is	needed	but
no	 attention,	 no	 caressing,	 never	 a	 'hello'.	And	with	 the	 other	 plant	 chitchat	 a
little,	hug	it	a	little,	kiss	it.	And	you	will	be	surprised	that	the	plant	that	has	been
given	attention	grows	faster.	In	fact	within	weeks	it	will	be	double	the	size	of	the
neglected	one,	it	will	bring	bigger	flowers	and	bigger	fruits.
Although	 it	 cannot	 speak,	 it	 cannot	 say	 to	 you	 thankyou,	 this	 is	 its	 way	 of
thanking	you.	Those	bigger	flowers	and	bigger	fruits	are	enough	proof	 that	 the
communication	 has	 happened,	 that	 the	 plant	 has	 felt	 deep	 down	 that	 there	 is
somebody	who	cares.
The	same	happens	 in	 the	 inner	world:	 if	we	remain	deserts	we	are	at	fault.	We
have	not	taken	any	care	of	it,	we	have	never	even	bothered	about	it.
Sannyas	means	the	beginning	of	a	new	care	in	your	life,	becoming	attentive	to
your	inner	needs.	And	the	most	important	thing	is	attention:	pay	more	attention
to	your	own	centre.	Whenever	you	have	time	close	your	eyes	to	the	whole	world
and	forget	all	about	it.	Shower	your	centre	with	all	your	attention,	care,	love,	and
soon	 you	 will	 see	 flowers	 coming	 up.	 It	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 gardening,	 a	 kind	 of
farming,	and	it	brings	tremendous	joy	because	when	you	come	to	see	the	flowers
of	consciousness	you	know	that	 life	has	not	been	a	wastage,	 that	you	have	not
missed	the	opportunity,	that	you	have	used	it.
Man	ordinarily	lives	in	a	state	of	unconsciousness,	he	lives	almost	in	a	kind	of
sleep.	Only	in	a	very	minimal	way	is	he	aware,	and	even	that	not	the	whole	time;
only	 in	emergency	situations.	 If	somebody	suddenly	comes	with	a	knife	 to	kill
you,	then	for	a	moment	you	are	alert.	Then	you	will	see	what	I	mean	when	I	say
man	lives	in	sleep.	Suddenly	you	will	see	a	change:	you	are	no	longer	as	sleepy
as	you	were	just	a	moment	before,	a	great	alertness	has	come.	You	are	shocked.
All	 your	 thinking	 disappears,	 all	 your	 dreaming	 disappears,	 the	 fantasies	 that
continuously	go	on	and	on	stop.	For	a	moment	the	whole	mind	stops,	there	is	a
blank,	an	interval.	In	that	interval	you	are	alert.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
George	Gurdjieff	used	to	say,	and	he	seems	to	be	very	close	to	the	truth,	"I	have
observed	hundreds	of	people	and	my	feeling	is	that	if	a	person	can	attain	a	few
seconds	of	awareness	in	his	whole	life,	that	seems	to	be	more	than	enough."	A
few	seconds	--	even	those	few	seconds	are	not	available.
We	 live	 like	 robots,	machines.	We	go	on	doing	 things,	 and	efficiently	 too,	but
that	does	not	prove	that	we	are	conscious.	In	fact	all	machines	are	efficient	and
robots	can	do	almost	every	kind	of	thing	that	you	are	doing;	computers	can	do
things	better,	more	efficiently	and	more	quickly.
Now	they	say	that	in	the	next	century	there	is	going	to	be	trouble	because	there
will	be	many	robots.
They	may	be	already	around,	but	you	don't	recognise	them.	They	will	look	just
like	you.	They	will	talk	like	you	and	they	will	be	very	efficient	and	very	healthy,
they	will	not	fall	ill.
Machines	 are	 machines	 --	 they	 will	 remain	 young	 longer,	 they	 will	 be	 more
powerful.	 Only	 once	 in	 a	while	when	 something	mechanical	 goes	wrong	will
you	recognise	that	it	is	a	machine,	not	a	real	man.	For	example,	the	battery	runs
down...	 The	 robot	 was	 making	 love	 and	 suddenly	 he	 says	 'Grrrgrrrrgrrr'.	 The
woman	 will	 become	 afraid	 --	 what	 is	 happening?	 He	 cannot	 speak;	 you	may
have	 to	 look	 into	 his	 pockets	 and	 find	 out	 what	 number	 robot	 he	 is,	 what
computer	has	 to	be	enquired	about	for	him,	and	what	has	 to	be	done	and	what
workshop	 he	 has	 to	 be	 taken	 to.	 They	 will	 carry	 small	 identity	 cards	 and
numbers	 for	 emergency	 situations.	 Or	 you	 will	 have	 to	 plug	 him	 into	 the
electricity	so	that	he	comes	back	to	normal.
Otherwise	 it	 will	 be	 difficult	 to	 make	 any	 distinction.	 They	 may	 already	 be
around	--	they	may	be	sitting	here!	If	somebody	goes	'Grrgrrr'...	Be	watchful!
Man,	as	he	has	existed	for	centuries	--	the	common	man,	the	ordinary	man,	the
mob,	the	crowd	--	 is	mechanical.	It	 is	only	through	consciousness	that	you	can
go	beyond	this	mechanicalness.	And	that	is	the	real	birth,	then	you	become	twice
born.	Through	your	parents	you	are	only	given	a	biological	birth,	not	a	spiritual
birth.
The	spiritual	birth	is	possible	only	through	the	master.	Hence	in	the	East	we	have
ancient	scriptures	which	say	that	it	is	easy	to	pay	all	your	debts	to	your	parents,
but	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 pay	 the	 debt	 to	 your	master.	And	 it	 is	 true	 because	 the
parents	have	given	to	you	only	a	biological	birth,	and	in	fact	they	have	not	given
you	anything	consciously.	They	were	not	even	thinking	about	you.	You	are	just
an	 accident	 to	 them,	 they	were	not	waiting	 for	 you.	They	knew	nothing	 about
you	--	how	could	they	have	waited	for	you?	They	might	have	been	just	attracted
to	each	other	by	a	biological	pull,	by	something	like	gravitation,	and	out	of	that
pull	you	were	born.	In	fact	you	are	just	accidental	in	that	way.
But	with	a	master	a	totally	different	journey	begins.	You	are	given	a	birth,	a	new
birth,	a	new	dimension:	the	spiritual	dimension.	And	it	is	given	very	consciously,
very	deliberately.
The	 whole	 work	 of	 the	 master	 upon	 the	 disciple	 is	 to	 bring	 him	 so	 some
consciousness	of	his	self,	of	his	being.	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	an	effort
to	make	you	conscious,	to	help	you	to	rise	above	your	biology.
People	live	as	biological	units	and	die	as	biological	units.	Very	few	people	have
attained	 to	 their	 spiritual	 selves,	 and	 those	 that	 do	 are	 the	 only	 real	 men.
Everybody	 has	 the	 potential	 but	 people	 never	work	 on	 it,	 so	 it	 remains	 just	 a
potential	and	it	is	lost.
It	can	become	actual.	So	make	it	a	point	that	from	now	onwards	your	whole	life
will	become	a	concentrated	effort	to	become	more	and	more	conscious.	And	as
glimpses	 of	 consciousness	 start	 arising	 in	 you,	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:	 bliss
follows	 each	 moment	 of	 consciousness.	 As	 consciousness	 deepens,	 bliss
deepens.	Bliss	is	the	consequence,	the	by-product,	of	being	conscious.
Pleasure	is	animal	--	and	many	people	live	at	 that	 level.	They	look	like	human
beings	but	because	pleasure	remains	their	only	goal...	It	may	be	through	sex,	it
may	be	through	food;	those	two	are	the	most	basic	sources	of	their	pleasure,	and
they	 are	 interchangeable	 too:	 if	 they	 repress	 their	 sexuality,	 they	 start	 eating
more;	if	they	become	too	involved	in	sexuality	their	fatness	disappears,	they	eat
less.
Ninety-nine	 per	 cent	 of	 people	 live	 at	 that	 level,	which	 is	 not	 better	 than	 any
other	animal.	And	animals	can	be	forgiven,	but	not	man,	because	animals	can't
do	anything	about	it	and	man	can	do	something	about	it.
He	has	the	capacity	to	rise	above	it.
Human	beings	don't	even	become	human,	what	to	say	about	divine?	Happiness
is	human.	Very	few	people	know	the	distinction	between	pleasure	and	happiness.
They	go	on	thinking	that	pleasure	is	happiness
--	it	is	not.	Happiness	is	something	far	superior,	far	more	refined.
Sex	 is	 animal,	 but	 then	 it	 is	 pure	 lust,	 a	 gratification	 of	 a	 bodily	 need.	 It	 is
physiological,	 biological,	 nothing	more	 than	 that.	 Love	 is	 human.	 Love	 is	 far
higher	than	sex.	Sex	may	be	one	part	of	it,	and	that	too,	not	necessarily.	You	can
have	a	non-sexual	relationship	and	a	very	joyous	relationship	--	you	can	have	a
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
friendship	which	may	be	even	more	satisfying	than	any	sexual	relationship,	far
more	deep-going,	far	more	ecstatic;	and	sex	can	be	a	part	of	it,	but	only	a	part.
There	is	much	more	in	love	than	sex.	And	whether	it	is	a	part	or	not,	the	moment
your	 being	 becomes	 love-full,	 it	 transforms	 the	 very	 nature	 of	 sexuality	 too.
Then	it	is	not	biological,	then	it	is	more	of	the	nature	of	play.	It	has	nothing	to	do
with	 reproduction,	 it	 is	 just	 enjoying	 the	 company	 of	 the	 other.	 One	 of	 the
dimensions	can	be	sex,	and	that	too,	not	necessarily.
And	then	in	happiness	there	are	many	more	things	which	animals	are	absolutely
incapable	 of	 enjoying:	 poetry,	 painting,	music,	 sculpture.	 A	 thousand	 and	 one
things	 are	 there	 --	 the	whole	world	 of	 art	 and	 aesthetics.	And	 you	 can	 see	 in
music	also,	music	that	really	belongs	to	the	animal	part	of	you.	Particularly	the
modern	music,	jazz	and	pop	music,	belongs	to	the	animal	part	of	you.	Classical
music	has	a	totally	different	dimension.	Beethoven	or	Mozart	or	Wagner	--	they
take	you	into	a	totally	different	world.
And	 eastern	 classical	 music	 takes	 you	 even	 higher	 because	 it	 is	 part	 of
meditativeness.	 It	almost	 touches	 the	divine.	 It	was	born	 in	 the	 temples,	 it	was
born	 in	 the	monasteries.	 It	was	 born	 through	 sannyasins,	 not	 through	ordinary
people	 but	 through	 people	who	were	 tremendously	meditative.	 It	 came	 out	 of
their	 meditation.	 They	 had	 heard	 something	 fo	 the	 celestial	 music	 and	 they
wanted	 to	 bring	 something	 to	 humanity.	 Their	 music	 represents	 something
celestial	 --	 something	 of	 it,	 a	 reflection.	 It	 is	 a	 far-away	 echo,	 but	 still;	 a
reflection	of	the	moon	is	a	reflection	of	the	moon:	it	is	a	reflection	but	somehow
it	represents	the	moon,	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	the	moon.
Bliss	 is	 the	highest	dimension	of	 joy.	 the	 first	 is	pleasure	 --	 that	 is	animal,	 the
second	is	happiness	--	that	is	human,	and	bliss	is	divine.
Sex	 is	animal,	 love	 is	human,	prayer	 is	divine.	 In	 love	 there	may	be	sex,	 there
may	not	be.	In	prayer	there	is	no	possibility	of	sex,	is	simply	disappears.	Hence
tantra	cannot	be	understood	by	ordinary	people;	they	are	bound	to	misunderstand
it.	It	is	prayer.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	sex.	Even	making	love	has	nothing	to	do
with	sex.	When	it	becomes	a	meditation,	a	prayer	--	just	the	melting	and	meeting
and	merging	 of	 energies	 in	 a	 prayerful	mood.	 It	 is	 not	 even	 fun	 or	 play,	 it	 is
devotion.
Bliss	 is	 the	goal	because	only	 in	blissfulness	do	you	 touch	 the	highest	peak	of
your	being,	you	come	to	your	total	realisation.	Man	is	a	three-storeyed	building.
The	 ground	 floor	 is	 animal.	 And	 it	 is	 good,	 nothing	 is	 wrong	 in	 it;	 I	 am	 not
against	it,	but	I	would	like	everybody	to	know	something	of	the	higher.	Let	the
lower	be	the	base,	but	don't	remain	confined	to	it.	The	second	floor	is	human	and
the	third	floor	is	divine.
In	knowing	bliss	one	comes	to	know	one's	godliness,	one	is	a	god.	And	unless
this	is	realised,	remember:	life	remains	unfulfilled,	it	remains	a	deep	frustration,
a	discontentment.	When	you	have	reached	your	ultimate	peak,	only	then	is	there
contentment,	peace,	silence,	a	deep	satisfaction	that	one	has	arrived.
Gold	has	always	been	symbolic,	both	in	the	East	and	in	the	West.	For	centuries
alchemists	 have	 talked	 about	 it,	 and	 they	have	been	very	much	misunderstood
because	people	thought	that	they	were	talking	about	real	god.	They	were	talking
about	gold	only	as	a	metaphor.
Man	can	become	gold,	he	has	 all	 the	chemicals	needed	 for	 that	 transmutation,
but	those	chemicals	have	to	be	mixed	in	the	right	proportion,	heated	in	the	right
way	to	the	right	degree.	Only	in	a	mystery	school	is	that	possible.	It	is	the	world
of	 inner	 chemistry.	 And	 the	moment	 everything	 inside	 you	 is	 put	 in	 the	 right
place	a	great	harmony	arises.
Ordinarily	a	man	is	 like	an	orchestra	 in	which	there	 is	no	leader,	no	guide	and
everybody	is	playing	solo.
Although	it	is	an	orchestra	everybody	is	playing	solo	according	to	his	own	ideas,
not	bothering	about	others,	what	they	are	doing,	not	making	any	effort	to	bring	a
harmony;	 hence	 the	 noise,	 hence	 the	 craziness	 inside,	 the	 insanity.	Almost	 the
whole	of	humanity	is	insane.	Of	course	people	differ	in	degrees:	a	few	people	are
more	 insane	 and	 a	 few	 are	 less,	 but	 a	 difference	 of	 degree	 is	 not	 much	 of	 a
difference.
Only	very	few	people	--	once	in	a	while	a	Buddha,	a	Lao	Tzu,	a	Basho,	a	Jesus	--
only	very	 few	people	have	been	able	 to	become	guides	of	all	 their	 elementary
forces	and	have	been	able	to	play,	not	solo,	but	to	become	part	in	an	orchestra.
These	 few	 people	who	 have	 been	 able	 to	 bring	 some	 accord	 into	 their	 beings
have	known	the	ultimate	truth.
That's	 what	 is	meant	 by	 gold.	 It	 is	 the	most	 precious	metal,	 hence	 it	 became
symbolic.
The	man	who	knows	what	to	do	with	all	his	elementary	forces	becomes	gold;	his
life	 becomes	 really	 precious.	 Each	 moment	 is	 so	 inestimably	 valuable,	 each
moment	is	such	a	gift	that	one	cannot	be	thankful	enough	for	it.	There	is	no	way
to	 show	our	gratitude	 to	god.	His	gift	 is	 of	 such	 immense	proportions	 that	we
don't	really	deserve	it.	He	has	given	it	out	of	his	abundance.
Knowing	this	accord,	feeling	this	accord	one	becomes	blissful.	And	out	of	that
bliss	arises	a	thankfulness	towards	existence.	That	thankfulness	is	prayer.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007185
ShortTitle:	GWIND18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Misery	is	a	by-product	of	being	unconscious,	unaware	and	in	the	same	way	bliss
is	also	a	by-product,	 a	by-product	of	being	conscious,	alert,	watchful,	vigilant.
These	two	alternatives	are	available	to	man:	either	he	can	live	in	an	unconscious
mechanical	way	or	he	can	live	with	a	deep	awareness	of	each	moment,	each	act,
each	thought,	each	feeling.
As	you	start	becoming	aware	bliss	follows	of	its	own	accord.	Everybody	wants
to	attain	to	bliss	but	nobody	tries	to	be	aware.	That's	why	people	desire	bliss	and
still	remain	miserable.	It	is	not	possible	to	achieve	bliss	directly.
You	can	achieve	vigilance	--	that	is	possible.	That's	the	whole	art	of	meditation,
the	whole	 secret	 of	 religion.	And	 then	bliss	 follows.	 Jesus	has	 a	 tremendously
beautiful	saying.	He	says	'Seek	ye	first	the	kingdom	of	god	then	all	else	shall	be
added	 unto	 you.'	 Don't	 be	 bothered	 about	 anything	 else.	 People	 are	 worried
about	everything	else	except	the	kingdom	of	god	--	and	that's	why	they	remain
failures.	They	are	interested	in	attaining	the	fragrance	but	they	are	not	interested
in	growing	the	rose	bush,	in	growing	flowers.
How	can	they	achieve	fragrance?	It	is	impossible.
Grow	the	flowers,	plant	the	seeds	for	flowers	then	one	day,	fragrance	comes.	It	is
a	natural	phenomenon,	it	is	inevitable;	you	need	not	worry	about	it.
Be	watchful,	and	you	will	be	surprised:	in	the	same	proportion	bliss	is	going	to
happen,	and	without	any	other	effort	on	your	part.	Go	on	making	efforts	in	the
direction	of	being	aware.
Man	 cannot	 be	 virtuous	 unless	 he	 is	 blissful.	 In	 the	 past	 religions	 have	 been
teaching	 just	 the	 opposite;	 hence	 the	 failure	 of	 the	 old	 religions.	All	 religions
have	failed.	Humanity	has	not	become	religious	at	all.
After	thousands	of	years	of	teaching,	nothing	much	has	happened.	Only	very	few
people	have	been	really	religious	--	a	Jesus,	a	Buddha,	a	Krishna	--	just	people
who	can	be	counted	on	 fingers.	They	can	be	 thought	as	exceptional.	They	 just
prove	the	rule:	that	millions	of	people	have	remained	absolutely	irreligious.
Something	 has	 gone	wrong	 basically;	 religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 something
fundamentally	wrong.
They	have	been	telling	people:	be	good,	first	be	virtuous	be	moral	and	then	you
will	be	rewarded	with	bliss.	That	is	not	so,	that	is	just	the	opposite	of	the	truth.
Be	 blissful	 and	 you	 will	 be	 good.	 A	 person	 who	 is	 blissful	 cannot	 be	 bad	 to
anybody,	he	cannot	do	wrong	--	it	is	impossible.	When	you	are	blissful	you	share
your	 bliss	 with	 people.	 And	 that's	 what	 good	 is,	 virtue	 is:	 sharing	 your	 bliss.
When	you	are	blissful	you	become	a	blessing	to	others;	when	you	are	miserable,
how	can	you	be	a	blessing	to	others?	Even	if	you	intend	to	be	a	blessing	you	are
not	going	to	be	a	blessing,	you	will	be	a	curse.
And	 that's	what	one	can	watch	and	see.	 I	 am	not	 talking	about	any	 theoretical
phenomenon:	 everybody	 wants	 to	 help	 but	 everybody	 harms.	 Parents	 want	 to
help	children;	their	intentions	are	good	but	the	outcome	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
is	not	good.	The	teachers	want	to	help	the	students;	the	universities	are	there	to
create	better	citizens	but	nothing	happens.	The	churches,	the	priests,	the	temples
everywhere	are	trying	to	make	life	more	beautiful	--
it	goes	on	becoming	more	and	more	ugly.	And	I	am	not	doubting	their	intentions,
I	am	not	saying	that	their	intentions	are	wrong;	their	intentions	are	very	good	but
very	unscientific.	They	want	you	to	live	long	and	they	go	on	giving	you	poison.
Their	desire	is	good	but	what	they	do	is	not	good,	it	cannot	be	good.	They	are
miserable,	so	anything	that	they	do	brings	misery	to	others.	We	can	only	give	to
others	what	not	we	have	already	got;	vice	versa	is	not	possible.	You	cannot	give
bliss	if	you	are	miserable,	and	you	cannot	be	helpful	if	you	yourself	are	living	in
a	dark	valley,	in	darkness.	When	you	are	full	of	light,	when	your	whole	being	is
full	of	blissfulness,	naturally,	whatsoever	you	do	brings	joy	to	others.
And	 blissfulness	 comes	 through	meditation,	 not	 by	 being	 virtuous.	Meditation
brings	bliss,	bliss	brings	virtue:	this	is	the	fundamental	law.
Nothing	else	makes	a	man	victorious	except	when	he	becomes	blissful.	Money,
power,	prestige,	fame	--
nothing	helps	to	be	victorious.	The	real	victory	consists	of	being	blissful.
Alexander	the	Great	is	not	the	really	victorious	person;	Jesus	Christ	is,	although
Jesus	dies	on	 the	cross	and	Alexander	dies	as	 the	most	powerful	person	 in	 the
whole	history	of	man,	 the	greatest	conqueror,	 the	man	who	 ruled	 the	whole	of
the	 earth	 as	 it	was	 known	at	 that	moment.	But	 still	 he	 is	 not	 victorious.	Deep
down	he	also	knew	it.
On	his	deathbed	he	wept	and	he	said	to	his	friends,	his	generals,	'When	you	take
my	coffin	to	the	grave,	let	my	hands	hang	outside	the	coffin.'	They	were	puzzled.
They	 said	 'That	 is	never	done.	Why	are	you	asking	 such	an	absurd	 thing?'	He
said	'I	want	to	let	it	be	known	to	everybody	that	I	am	going	empty-handed.
Let	 people	 see	my	 hands.	 I	 am	 dying	 as	 a	 beggar.	My	whole	 life	 has	 been	 a
wastage.	I	remained	concerned	with	unnecessary,	non-essential	things.	I	have	not
done	anything	really	worthwhile.	I	am	dying	ignorant	of	myself...'	although	one
of	 his	 teachers	 was	 Plato,	 the	 direct	 disciple	 of	 Socrates,	 and	 the	 teaching	 of
Socrates	was	 carried	down	by	Plato	 to	Alexander	 and	 the	whole	 teaching	was
based	on	a	single	fundamental	and	that	was:	Know	thyself.	He	wept	because	he
did	 not	 know	 who	 he	 was.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 victory,	 to	 know	 oneself,	 and	 in
knowing	oneself	bliss	arises.
In	that	very	knowing	you	are	showered	with	bliss.
Aurora	means	 the	dawn,	 the	 early	morning	when	 the	 sun	 is	 just	 about	 to	 rise,
when	the	east	has	become	red	and	the	birds	have	started	singing	and	the	flowers
are	opening	and	the	whole	earth	is	getting	ready	to	receive	the	sun.	Exactly	the
same	happens	in	the	inner	world	with	meditation.
The	 colour	 of	 sannyas	 is	 the	 colour	 of	 the	 dawn,	 the	 early	 morning	 sun.	 It
represents	the	inner	dawn.	A	man	who	has	not	known	meditation	lives	in	a	dark
night	 of	 the	 soul.	He	has	 not	 seen	 inner	 light.	And	 if	 you	 are	 full	 of	 darkness
inside	your	life	is	bound	to	remain	miserable	because	all	your	actions	will	come
out	of	your	darkness;	they	are	bound	to	be	wrong.	You	are	bound	to	fall	here	and
there.	Your	whole	life	will	be	that	of	stumbling	from	one	error	to	another	error.
That's	what	people	are	doing:	moving	from	one	mistake	to	another	mistake.
As	they	grow	old,	their	misery	becomes	bigger	and	bigger.	They	carry	mountains
of	misery	 for	 the	simple	 reason	 that	 they	have	not	 tried	 to	bring	any	 light	 into
their	inner	source.	And	it	is	very	simple	to	do	it,	people	have	just	never	been	told
to	go	in.
The	vested	interests	are	against	it;	 they	don't	want	people	who	are	full	of	inner
light.	The	people	who	are	powerful	--	the	politicians,	the	rich,	the	priests	--	are
all	 against	 it,	 because	 a	man	who	has	 his	 own	 inner	 light	 cannot	 be	 enslaved.
You	can	kill	him	but	you	cannot	enslave	him.	Basically	he	 remains	 rebellious,
because	he	cannot	do	anything	wrong.	Whatsoever	the	cost	he	will	always	do	the
right	thing.	He	can	risk	his	life	but	he	cannot	risk	his	light.
The	powerful	people	became	aware	of	that	fact	long	ago;	hence	all	their	efforts
are	 to	 prevent	 every	 child	 from	 entering	 into	 his	 interiority.	 The	 schools,	 the
college,	the	universities,	the	churches	--	they	all	exist	to	make	people	extroverts.
That	is	a	subtle	strategy,	a	spiritual	exploitation	and	oppression.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 rebellious	 souls,	 people	 who	 have	 their	 own
intelligence	and	who	are	 ready	 to	 live	according	 to	 their	own	 inner	 light,	even
though	 they	 have	 to	 sacrifice	 their	whole	 life	 for	 it.	 Even	 a	 single	moment	 of
absolute	 freedom	 is	more	 valuable	 than	 a	 long	 life	 of	 slavery,	 because	 in	 that
single	moment	of	intensity	you	come	to	know	god.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Man	without	meditation	is	homeless,	he	has	no	refuge.	He	is	just	like	driftwood,
accidental	--	goes	on	living	from	one	event	to	another	event,	not	knowing	why,
not	knowing	from	where	he	comes,	where	he	 is	destined	 to	go,	why	he	exists,
how	to	exist	so	that	you	can	know	the	truth	of	your	being	and	the	mystery	of	life.
Without	meditation	everything	remains	closed.	Meditation	is	the	key.	And	just	as
a	 simple	 key	 can	 open	 a	 complex	 lock....	 Mind	 is	 like	 a	 complex	 lock	 and
meditation	is	a	very	simple	key	but	it	can	open	the	complex	lock	--	and	behind
the	mind	is	the	real	treasure.
Once	you	can	enter	and	by-pass	 the	barrier	of	 the	mind,	you	are	 in	 for	a	great
surprise;	you	are	carrying	the	very	kingdom	of	God	within	you.	And	to	know	it
is	 to	 know	 one's	 real	 home.	 To	 know	 it	 is	 to	 become	 part	 of	 the	 mystery	 of
existence.	To	know	it	is	to	know	deathlessness,	eternity.	Once	it	is	known,	then
your	ordinary	life	is	no	more	ordinary;	it	becomes	full	of	grace,	beauty,	music,
celebration.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 taking	 a	 vow	 to	 enter	 into	 the	 world	 of
meditation.	Now	all	your	efforts	 should	be	concentratedly	centered	on	a	single
point:	how	to	be	more	meditative,	more	aware,	more	conscious.	And	once	you
pour	all	your	energies	into	one	direction	it	starts	happening.	All	that	is	needed	is
intensity	and	passion.
Sannyas	has	to	be	a	love	affair	so	that	you	can	put	your	total	energy	into	it.	Then
things	start	happening	on	their	own.
Heather	is	a	wild	shrub,	with	thousands	of	flowers,	very	long-lasting.
So	is	meditation,	with	only	one	difference:	it	is	also	evergreen,	it	is	also	wild,	but
its	flowers	are	not	only	long-lasting,	they	are	everlasting.	Once	attained	they	are
yours	forever,	for	eternity,	because	meditation	means	transcending	mind.
Time	is	part	of	mind.	The	moment	you	transcend	mind,	you	transcend	time	too;
they	 disappear	 simultaneously.	 And	 when	 time	 disappears	 you	 know	 eternity.
Eternity	 is	 always	now,	 it	 is	 always	present;	 it	 never	becomes	past,	 it	 is	never
future.	There	is	no	past,	no	future,	there	is	only	the	present.
Present	in	fact	is	not	part	of	time.	Time	is	past	and	future.	Present	is	eternity,	just
touching	the	periphery	of	time.	That's	why	you	cannot	hold	the	present	moment,
you	cannot	pinpoint	it.	The	moment	you	say	'It	is,'
it	is	no	more;	it	only	touches	it.	The	moment	you	become	aware	of	the	present	it
is	 already	 past.	 Either	 it	 is	 in	 the	 future	 --	 then	 you	 have	 to	 wait	 for	 it:	 it	 is
coming,	coming,	coming	--	either	it	is	coming	or	it	is	gone.
But	you	cannot	catch	hold	of	it	while	it	is	there	--	it	is	just	a	touch.
We	live	in	the	past	and	the	future	if	we	live	in	mind,	and	both	are	non-existential.
Past	 is	 no	 more,	 future	 is	 not	 yet.	 That's	 why	 our	 life	 remains	 almost	 non-
substantial,	the	same	as	dreams,	made	of	the	same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of.
The	reality	consists	only	of	 the	present.	When	you	move	beyond	the	mind	you
start	living	in	the	present.
And	 the	beauty	of	being	 in	 the	present	 is	 immense,	 inestimable,	 inexpressible,
indefinable.	Words	like
'truth',	 'god',	 'nirvana',	 'enlightenment',	 are	 just	 ways	 of	 expressing	 the
inexpressible.	 But	 in	 fact	 it	 remains	 unexpressed.	 These	 words	 are	 just	 like
fingers	pointing	to	the	moon.	Don't	become	too	interested	in	the	fingers.	Look	at
the	moon	and	forget	the	fingers.
Being	 here	 with	 me	 your	 whole	 effort	 has	 to	 be	 that	 of	 meditation.	 And
meditation	means	a	jump	from	the	mind	into	the	no-mind,	from	thought	into	no-
thought,	from	noise	into	silence,	from	constant	movement	in	the	mind	to	a	deep
stillness	 of	 the	 heart.	 And	 suddenly,	 you	 enter	 into	 the	 evergreen	world,	 with
millions	of	flowers	--	flowers	of	eternity.
That's	 exactly	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 word	 'paradise'.	 The	 word	 'paradise'	 comes
from	the	Persian,	'firdaus'.
Firdaus	means	a	garden	full	of	evergreen	trees,	full	of	ever-blossoming	flowers.
It	has	lost	its	meaning	in	English	but	it	is	rooted	in	the	word	'firdaus':	a	walled
garden.
There	are	a	few	animals	in	the	world	--	the	bear	is	one	of	them	--	which	know
the	 art	 of	 going	 into	 hibernation.	 Frogs	 know	 it:	 after	 the	 rains	 they	 simply
disappear,	they	move	into	the	earth	and	lie	down	there	almost	dead.	They	don't
breathe,	they	don't	eat.	They	go	into	a	kind	of	suspended	life;	for	eight	months
they	will	remain	in	that	same	suspended	coma,	dead	and	yet	not	dead.	Dead	in
one	sense,	because	they	are	no	more	breathing,	all	functioning	has	stopped,	but
they	are	not	dead	in	another	sense!	because	as	the	rains	come	again,	they	will	be
revived.
In	Yoga	 there	are	a	 few	exercises	which	can	make	a	man	perform	such	 things
also.	There	have	been	yogis	who	practise	such	things.	In	fact,	they	have	nothing
to	 do	with	 religion,	 of	 no	 intrinsic	 value,	 but	 people	 are	 very	much	 surprised,
because	 if	a	yogi	goes	 into	 the	earth	 for	six	months	or	nine	months,	 lies	down
there	and	then	comes	back	alive	again	it	seems	like	a	miracle.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Once	it	happened	in	Egypt,	in	1880,	a	man	performed	such	a	miraculous	feat.	He
went	for	twenty	years;	it	was	the	longest	record.	But	people	forgot	to	take	him
out	after	twenty	years.	Twenty	years	is	a	long	time;	the	people	who	had	put	him
into	the	earth	had	died.	He	remained	buried	under	the	earth	for	forty	years.
Looking	 into	some	old	records	a	 librarian	came	 to	know	about	 this	 fact,	 that	a
man	was	lying	buried	in	a	certain	place.	People	had	forgotten	about	him	and	he
must	 be	 dead	 by	 now	 because	 it	 was	 1920.	He	was	 to	 be	 dug	 out	 in	 1900	 --
twenty	more	years	had	passed...
The	place	was	searched	and	 the	man	was	 found.	When	he	was	brought	out	he
was	 almost	 dead.	 But	 he	 was	 massaged	 according	 to	 the	 instructions	 he	 had
given	forty	years	ago.	It	was	on	record	what	you	had	to	do:	you	had	to	massage
and	give	him	a	bath.	All	the	things	were	done	and	he	lived	for	three	more	years!
That	 is	 the	 longest	 record,	 forty	 years,	 of	 remaining	 in	 suspended	 life,	 neither
dead	nor	alive.
The	bear	 is	also	capable	of	doing	it,	particularly	 the	bears	 that	exist	 in	Siberia,
because	when	it	is	so	cold	that	they	cannot	move	they	go	under	the	ice	and	they
lie	down	there,	frozen,	for	nine	months.	Only	for	three	months	is	it	worth	living,
otherwise	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 live.	 Hence	 the	 bear	 has	 become	 the	 symbol	 of
resurrection.
Man	can	be	reborn	through	meditation,	he	can	have	a	new	life.	The	ordinary	life
is	not	much;	it	is	just	so-so,	lukewarm	--	somehow	we	are	alive.	It	is	a	suspended
kind	of	 life.	A	Buddha	 lives	because	he	 lives	with	such	 totality,	such	 intensity,
with	such	awareness.	Ordinarily	people	simply	go	on	making	empty	movements,
empty	 gestures.	 They	 appear	 to	 be	 living	 but	 they	 are	 not	 really,	 not
authentically.	Not	knowing	at	all	what	they	are	doing,	they	go	on	doing	things,
almost	 under	 a	 kind	 of	 natural	 hypnosis.	Whatsoever	 their	 instincts	 tell	 them
they	go	on	doing.	They	will	reproduce	children	just	as	their	parents	reproduced
them,	not	knowing	exactly	what	they	are	doing	and	whether	they	should	do	it	or
not...	Some	biological	urge	forcing	them.	They	will	reproduce	children	and	they
will	 die.	 And	 their	 children	 will	 go	 on	 doing	 the	 same	 thing	 for	 centuries	 to
come.
Each	 generation	 repeats	 the	 same	mechanical	 pattern.	 It	 is	 through	meditation
that	one	can	escape	from	this	prison	of	biology,	from	this	prison	of	mechanical,
repetitive	life	and	can	be	really	reborn.
Mind	is	always	old.	Even	a	one-day-old	child	has	a	one-day-old	mind,	because
mind	 means	 the	 past.	 It	 accumulates	 the	 past;	 it	 is	 accumulative	 it	 goes	 on
accumulating	 experiences	 and	 everything	 that	 happens.	 It	 is	 always	 old	 and	 it
goes	 on	 becoming	 older	 and	 older.	 But	 the	 heart	 is	 always	 young;	 it	 never
accumulates,	it	is	non-accumulative.	It	lives	in	the	moment.	That's	why	the	mind
and	the	heart	are	never	in	agreement,	they	cannot	be	in	agreement,	because	the
mind	talks	about	the	past	and	the	heart	wants	to	live	spontaneously,	right	now.
The	mind	always	gives	advice,	tries	to	be	very	wise,	calls	the	heart	a	fool,	mad,
and	all	kinds	of	names,	but	the	heart	never	becomes	wise	in	that	sense;	it	remains
a	fool.	And	it	is	good	that	it	remains	a	fool,	it	is	good	that	it	never	becomes	old,
because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 hope	 for	man.	 That	 is	 the	 only	 door	 to	 know	 reality,
because	reality	is	in	the	present.
Mind	 can	 never	 know	 anything	 about	 reality.	 It	 can	 have	 no	 encounter	 with
reality.	The	past	is	always	standing	in	between	like	a	wall,	and	the	wall	goes	on
becoming	bigger	and	bigger	every	day.	That's	why	children	are	more	alive,	more
spontaneous,	more	beautiful,	more	 joyous	 than	old	people.	Old	people	become
too	 experienced	 and	 everything	 that	 is	 spontaneous	 is	 not	 possible	 for	 an	 old
man.	He	has	a	condemnation	for	it;	he	has	a	thousand	and	one	opinions	about	it.
The	 mind	 calls	 love	 mad.	 Out	 of	 its	 experience,	 observation,	 knowledge,	 it
creates	a	false	kind	of	love	it	calls	marriage.	Marriage	is	an	invention	the	mind.
It	is	a	very	poor	substitute.	It	is	an	institution.	It	is	more	utilitarian,	certainly;	it
has	more	economic	value,	it	is	more	marketable,	it	is	more	worldly.	Love	looks
mad,	but	it	is	love	that	gives	you	feel	of	being	alive,	not	marriage.
And	 it	 is	 the	 same	 about	 anything	 else.	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,
Mohammedanism	--	these	are	mind	things.	To	be	with	Jesus	is	a	heart	thing,	but
that	 is	 possible	 only	when	 the	master	 is	 alive.	 To	 be	with	 the	 pope	 is	 a	mind
thing.	He	 has	 two	 thousand	 years	 of	 heritage.	 Jesus	was	 a	madman;	 no	 rabbi
followed	 him,	 no	 knowledgeable	 professor	 followed	 him,	 but	 simple	 people:
carpenters,	 fishermen,	 prostitutes,	 gamblers,	 drunkards	 --	 these	 type	 of	 people
who	are	really	simple	and	in	a	way	more	spontaneous.	A	prostitute	is	a	far	more
alive	being	than	a	rabbi.	I	respect	a	prostitute	more	than	a	rabbi,	because	a	rabbi
is	absolutely	dead.
Mary	Magdalene	was	far	more	alive	--	she	could	see	the	beauty	of	Jesus.	But	the
head-priest	of	the	great	temple	of	Jerusalem	could	not	see:	he	thought	'This	man
is	simply	dangerous,	a	madman	collecting	other	mad	young	people	and	trying	to
destroy	the	whole	social	structure.'
It	was	mind	crucifying	the	heart	when	Jesus	was	crucified.	That	has	always	been
so	and	that	will	always	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
be	so.	Only	the	heart	can	move	into	meditation,	only	the	heart	is	the	hope.	There
is	only	one	hope	for	man:	if	he	moves	from	the	head	to	the	heart,	starts	listening
to	 the	 heart	 and	 follows	 the	 heart.	 It	 is	 risky:	 everybody	 will	 condemn	 you,
everybody	 will	 think	 that	 something	 has	 gone	 wrong,	 that	 you	 have	 gone
cuckoo.	 But	 that	 has	 always	 been	 so:	 the	 people	 who	 had	 been	 with	 Buddha
were	 thought	 to	 be	 cuckoos	 and	 the	 people	who	 are	with	me	 are	 bound	 to	 be
thought	to	be	cuckoos.	But	to	be	a	cuckoo	with	a	Buddha	is	a	blessing!
So	feel	blessed!
Bliss	is	poetry.	It	is	not	science,	it	is	not	logic,	it	is	not	mind,	it	is	not	prose.	It	is
art,	it	is	dance,	it	is	music,	it	is	love:	it	is	poetry.	And	one	has	to	learn	the	ways
of	being	poetic;	 they	are	 totally	different.	 In	 the	world	mathematics	 is	needed,
not	music;	logic	is	needed,	not	love.	So	the	world	teaches	you	to	be	logical,	but
logic	destroys	your	 love,	which	is	far	more	valuable	because	it	 is	 through	love
that	you	will	know	god.	 It	 is	 through	being	poetic	 that	 there	 is	a	possibility	of
knowing	 the	 beauty	 of	 existence.	 It	 is	 tremendously	 beautiful,	 but	 we	 need	 a
different	perspective	to	see	the	beauty,	a	different	vision,	a	different	approach,	a
different	context	altogether.
Ordinarily,	what	we	have	been	taught	is	not	poetry.	We	have	been	brought	up	in
a	very	calculative	way.
We	are	being	made	 to	be	 cunning	and	clever	because	 that	 is	what	 succeeds	 in
life,	 that's	what	 helps	 you	 to	 achieve	 ambitions.	You	 are	 brought	 up	 in	 such	 a
way	that	you	can	go	on	power	trips	--	and	reality	is	not	a	power	trip,	it	is	not	an
ego	trip.
One	has	to	put	aside	the	ego	and	all	the	calculating	and	cunning	ways.	One	has
to	learn	something	of	the	aesthetic	sense;	one	has	to	be	more	sensitive,	more	in
tune	with	existence.	That's	what	I	call	poetry.
I	 don't	 mean	 that	 you	 have	 to	 read	 Shakespeare	 and	Milton	 and	 Shelley	 and
Byron.	When	I	say	poetry,	I	mean	that	you	have	to	be	in	a	love	affair	with	life;	it
should	not	be	calculative.	You	should	be	more	open	to	the	wind,	 to	the	sun,	 to
the	rain.	You	should	be	more	full	of	wonder	than	of	knowledge;	you	should	live
in	awe.
Each	moment	should	be	a	moment	of	awe,	of	wonder.	Looking	at	life	with	the
eyes	 of	 a	 child,	 the	 whole	 world	 becomes	 god-full.	 If	 your	 heart	 is	 full	 of
wonder,	 then	 the	world	 is	 full	of	god;	 if	your	heart	 is	calculative	and	cunning,
god	disappears	from	the	world,	god	dies.	Then	you	live	in	a	godless	world,	and
living	 in	 a	 godless	world	 is	 not	worth	 living	 at	 all.	 Life	 loses	 all	 significance
altogether.	It	becomes	absolutely	mundane,	a	commodity	--	and	that	is	the	ugliest
thing	that	can	happen	to	a	man.
My	sannyasins	have	to	 live	a	beautiful	 life;	a	 life	of	grace,	of	poetry,	of	music
and	 celebration.	 Dance,	 because	 it	 is	 through	 the	 dance...	 sing,	 because	 it	 is
through	singing...	that	you	will	become	vulnerable	to	god,	open	to	god.	It	is	not	a
question	of	argument,	it	is	not	a	question	of	proofs,	of	philosophy	or	theology.
The	word	 'love'	defines	sannyas	precisely.	And	a	heart	 full	of	 love	 is	naturally
full	of	poetry.	To	live	life	in	poetry	is	to	be	a	sannyasin.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007195
ShortTitle:	GWIND19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Misery	is	something	like	going	downhill:	it	is	so	easy,	no	intelligence	is	needed,
no	work	upon	yourself	is	needed.	You	can	simply	go	on	rolling	down,	under	the
influence	of	the	magnetic	field	of	the	earth,	by	gravitation.	But	if	you	want	to	go
uphill	then	intelligence	will	be	needed,	work	upon	yourself	will	be	needed
--	 and	 not	 a	 hectic	 kind	 of	work	 but	 something	 constant.	One	 never	 knows	 at
what	point	the	breakthrough	happens;	one	has	just	to	go	on	hammering.
Sometimes	it	happens	that	you	stop	just	before	it	was	going	to	happen;	just	one
more	step	and	the	goal	would	have	been	achieved.	So	one	has	 to	go	on	--	 it	 is
unpredictable.	Because	it	happens	differently	to	each	person,	there	is	no	way	to
predict	it.	A	few	people	need	a	little	effort,	a	few	people	a	little	less;	it	depends
on	many	past	lives.	If	you	have	worked	upon	your	inner	being	in	your	past	lives,
that	work	is	never	lost,	it	remains	with	you.	Whenever	you	start	working	again
for	your	spiritual	growth,	it	becomes	a	stepping	stone.
But	there	are	people	who	have	not	worked	at	all.	They	may	be	just	beginning	in
this	life,	this	time.	A	few	may	have	worked	hard	enough	and	just	a	little	crust	is
left	to	be	broken;	and	a	few	may	be	carrying	big	hard	walls	of	ego	--	they	will
need	constant	 hammering.	But	one	 thing	 is	 certain	 and	predictable,	 that	 if	 one
goes	on	working	it	happens,	it	is	bound	to	happen,	it	is	inevitable.	One	has	to	be
patient	and	industrious,	only	then	can	one	rise	above	misery.
Millions	of	people	are	miserable	it	needs	no	effort,	and	very	few	have	attained	to
bliss	 because	 very	 few	 have	 put	 their	 energies	 together	 and	 worked	 hard,
patiently,	 without	 bothering	 about	 the	 result,	 without	 hankering	 at	 all	 for	 the
result	to	be	quick.
Bliss	is	not	like	a	seasonal	flower;	it	can't	be	quick	in	that	way.	It	is	a	big	huge
thing;	it	takes	its	time;	its	course.
The	miserable	person	is	miserable	because	he	has	not	sharpened	his	intelligence.
He	allows	dust	to	gather	upon	his	intelligence,	and	intelligence	is	like	a	mirror,	if
you	allow	dust	to	gather	upon	it,	it	loses	its	essential	quality	of	being	reflective.
It	 functions	 like	a	mirror	no	more.	And	when	dust	 is	 too	 thick	you	completely
lose	track	of	the	mirror,	you	even	forget	all	about	it.	And	that's	how	people	have
been	 livings	 they	allow	the	dust	 to	gather.	That's	what	we	call	past,	memories.
And	 when	 I	 say	 memories	 I	 mean	 psychological	 memories,	 not	 factual
memories.	 Factual	 memories	 are	 perfectly	 good;	 they	 are	 simple	 information
accumulated	by	the	brain.
Psychological	memories...	Somebody	insulted	you	twenty	years	ago	and	it	is	still
there,	it	still	hurts.	It	still	affects	you.	If	you	see	that	person	you	can't	see	him	as
he	 is;	 that	 hurt	 stands	 between	 you	 and	 him.	 It	 affects	 your	 visions	 you	 look
through	that	feeling.	It	may	have	become	absolutely	unconscious.	You	may	say
'Hello'	to	him	and	'How	are	you?'	and	you	will	even	smile.	but	if	you	watch	and
observe	 your	 smile	 you	 will	 see	 there	 is	 some	 feeling	 which	 is	 holding	 your
smile	 back,	which	 is	 poisoning	 it.	You	 say	 'Hello',	 but	 reluctantly	 it	 is	 simply
formal,	it	has	no	heart	in	it.	You	enquire	how	he	is	because	it	is	part	of	etiquette,
mannerism,	 but	 you	 don't	 mean	 it,	 you	 are	 not	 interested	 at	 all.	 In	 fact,	 deep
down	you	are	still	wanting	to	take	revenge.	And	if	some	opportunity	arises	you
will	take	revenges	you	have	not	forgotten,	you	have	not	forgiven.
These	psychological	memories	accumulate	on	the	intelligence	like	dust	and	they
don't	 allow	 you	 to	 see	 reality	 as	 it	 is	 Otherwise	 it	 is	 blissful,	 tremendously
blissful.	Each	moment	can	be	an	ecstasy.	you	just	need	a	bright	mirror	to	reflect
it	in	its	totality,	in	its	intensity.	Then	each	moment	brings	so	much	grace	of	god,
it	 is	 immeasurable;	we	 cannot	 be	 thankful	 enough	 for	 it.	But	 very	 few	people
become	aware	of	the	beauty	of	existence,	of	the	beauty	of	people,	of	the	grace	of
the	animals,	of	the	green	and	the	gold	of	the	trees,	of	the	redness	and	liveliness
of	the	flowers.	Very	few	people	are	aware	of	the	music	of	the	rain	falling	on	the
roof,	the	song,	the	dance	of	it...
And	 because	 they	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 it	 all	 they	 remain	 imprisoned	 in	 the	 very
small	dark	hole	of	their	psychological	memories,	which	is	just	like	a	tunnel,	very
dark,	and	it	accumulates	all	kinds	of	negativities.
A	person	may	have	done	a	thousand	and	one	good	things	for	you	and	you	will
not	 remember,	but	 if	he	hurts	you	once	 that	 you	will	 remember.	He	may	have
been	a	friend	for	years,	may	have	done	many	things	for	you	--	 they	will	all	be
effaced,	erased	completely	by	a	single	thing	that	you	think	is	wrong.	It	may	not
be	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
wrong	at	all.	He	may	not	have	done	it	knowingly,	he	may	not	have	wanted	to	do
any	harm	 to	you.	 It	may	have	happened	by	chance,	or	 it	may	be	 just	 a	wrong
interpretation	on	your	part.	But	just	a	single	wound	is	enough	to	destroy	all	that
the	person	has	done...	as	if	we	are	hankering	to	collect	all	that	is	negative,	dark,
ugly.
We	 don't	 collect	 flowers,	 we	 collect	 thorns	 --	 this	 is	 the	 stupidity	 of	 human
beings	and	hence	the	hell.
Hell	is	not	somewhere	else;	we	create	it.	And	heaven	also	is	not	somewhere	else;
we	can	create.	We	have	as	much	capacity	to	create	heaven	around	our	being	as
we	 can	 create	 hell.	 It	 is	 the	 same	 energy	 which	 accumulates	 flowers,	 which
accumulates	thorns.	It	is	the	same	being;	just	a	little	different	perspective,	just	a
little	 change	 of	 understanding,	 of	 looking	 at	 things,	 and	 the	 whole	 world
changes.
Sannyas	is	nothing	but	that	little	change.	It	is	a	very	small	thing	but	it	makes	a
lot	of	difference.	It	transforms	the	whole	vision.	It	creates	a	totally	new	existence
for	you	and	then	life	is	a	joy.
A	sannyasin	has	to	live	life	joyously.	He	has	to	transform	small	things	into	great
rejoicings.	He	has	to	transform	the	mundane	into	the	sacred.
I	am	not	against	the	mundane.	I	am	all	for	transforming	it	because	it	contains	the
sacred.	The	old	religions	were	creating	a	division	between	the	mundane	and	the
sacred.	I	don't	create	any	division.	The	change	is	not	needed	on	the	outside;	you
are	not	to	leave	the	marketplace	and	go	to	a	monastery.	The	change	is	needed	in
your	 way	 of	 seeing.	 Then	 the	 mundane	 becomes	 sacred,	 the	 marketplace
becomes	more	beautiful	that	any	monastery	can	be.	And	that	is	real	work.
I	am	not	an	escapist	and	I	am	against	all	religious	attitudes	which	are	escapist.	I
believe	 in	 life	 and	 I	 believe	 in	 living	 life	 totally,	 but	 it	 can	be	 lived	 in	 such	 a
beautiful	way	 that	 slowly	 slowly	matter	disappears	and	 there	 is	only	godliness
surrounding	you.	And	that	is	truth,	that's	how	it	is.
Meditation	is	the	only	experience	that	gives	you	solid	proof	of	god's	existence.
Logic	is	of	no	help.
Philosophy	 cannot	 produce	 a	 single	 proof	 although	 for	 centuries	 philosophers
have	tried	--	but	all	in	vain.
They	have	made	very	articulate,	complicated	theories,	theologies,	philosophies,
trying	to	prove	god	--	but	they	have	all	failed.	All	their	proofs	are,	without	any
exception,	 childish	 and	 rooted	 in	 some	 flaw,	 in	 some	 fallacy.	They	 can	 befool
only	 people	 who	 want	 to	 be	 befooled,	 otherwise	 anybody	 of	 ordinary
intelligence	can	see	that	all	their	arguments	are	fallacious.
For	example,	all	the	philosophers	of	the	world	have	tried	to	prove	that	god	is	a
must	because	existence	needs	a	creator.	Now	 this	 is	good	 if	you	are	 talking	 to
small	children,	otherwise	it	is	stupid.	If	creation	needs	a	creator,	then	the	creator
itself	 will	 need	 a	 creator	 in	 its	 own	 turn.	 And	 then	 you	 fall	 into	 an	 infinite
regress:	A	creates	B.	B	creates	C,	C	creates	D	--	where	is	it	going	to	end?
Hence	a	man	 like	Gautam	Buddha	simply	said	 'Forget	all	 about	 this	nonsense.
The	whole	metaphysics	 is	nonsense,'	he	said.	And	he	has	a	great	 insight	about
that	thing;	he	says	'Don't	argue	about	god,	don't	ask	about	god,	because	there	is
no	 way	 to	 prove	 or	 disprove.'	 He	 simply	 puts	 aside	 all	 arguments,	 for	 and
against.	 He	 says	 'Rather	 put	 your	 energies	 into	 meditation	 and	 then	 see
whatsoever	 is.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to	 believe	 --	 when	 we	 can	 experience,	 why
believe?'
And	that's	precisely	my	approach	too	I	don't	want	you	to	believe	in	god,	I	want
you	to	know	that	which	is	--	and	that	is	godly.
You	may	not	come	to	know	god	as	a	person	because	there	is	nobody	as	a	person,
but	in	meditation	you	will	certainly	come	to	know	existence	as	divine,	as	godly.
The	quality	will	be	felt;	you	will	see	the	whole	existence	radiant	with	godliness.
In	that	radiance	you	are	included.	It	is	not	that	only	others	radiate	god,	you	also
radiate	gods	everything	becomes	part	of	a	divine	organic	unity.	But	it	is	not	to	be
believed	in.
One	need	not	be	a	theist	or	an	atheists	both	are	foolish.	A	really	religious	person
is	neither.	He	 is	 an	 enquirer,	 he	 says	 'I	 don't	 know	but	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 enquire.'
And	the	only	way	to	enquire	is	meditation,	because	meditation	takes	you	beyond
thoughts.	 If	 you	 remain	 in	 thoughts	 you	 remain	 within	 the	 boundary	 of
philosophy;	when	you	move	beyond	thoughts,	you	go	beyond	philosophy	--	and
that's	 where	 religion	 begins.	 Where	 philosophy	 ends,	 religion	 begins;	 where
mind	ends	meditation	begins.	And	meditation	is	the	only	religious	phenomenon.
Remember	 it:	 the	 only,	 hence	 it	 is	 the	 only	 door	 towards	 godliness,	 the	 only
bridge.
It	is	only	through	meditation	that	you	become	a	servant	of	god.	The	moment	you
know	 the	 godliness	 of	 existence	 you	 naturally	 become	 a	 servant.	 It	 is	 not
something	 imposed	 upon	 you	 by	 somebody	 else,	 it	 is	 out	 of	 your	 love	 for
existence.
Meditation	is	golden.	Gold	represents	the	highest	peak	of	consciousness	in	man;
it	is	an	alchemical	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
symbol.	 Alchemists	 were	 known	 all	 over	 the	 world	 as	 people	 who	 were
interested	in	changing	the	baser	metals	into	gold.	Really	they	were	interested	in
changing	the	baser	energies	of	man	into	golden	energies.
Man	comes	with	many	energies	but	in	a	raw	form;	like	diamonds	just	taken	out
of	 the	mine.	Only	 a	 jeweller	 can	 recognize	 them;	 to	others	 they	will	 look	 like
ordinary	 stones.	 But	 once	 they	 have	 been	 purified,	 cut,	 once	 the	 unnecessary
parts	 have	 been	 dropped	 and	 their	 hidden	 glory	 becomes	 expressed,	 then	 you
know	that	it	was	not	an	ordinary	stone;	it	was	carrying	a	hidden	treasure	within
it.
So	 is	 the	case	with	every	human	being.	Becoming	a	 sannyasin	means	entering
into	an	alchemical	school.
The	whole	effort	here	is	 to	make	gold	out	of	you.	We	are	born	with	it	--	 just	a
little	cleansing	is	needed	and	it	starts	shining	forth.	And	when	one	realizes	one's
glory	then	gratitude	arises,	and	gratitude	is	prayer.
Meditation	 transforms	 you,	 and	 the	 ultimate	 result	 is	 gratitude,	 prayer.	That	 is
the	fragrance	of	the	flower	of	meditation.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
I	don't	know.
Be	here.	There	is	no	need	to	know	--	be	here.	Real	Italians	never	go	back!
Love	 is	 the	 surest	 way	 to	 real	 victory	 but	 it	 is	 a	 very	 strange	 way,	 very
paradoxical,	 because	 love	 begins	 in	 surrender	 and	 ends	 in	 victory.	 That's	 its
paradox:	 love	 does	 not	want	 to	 be	 victorious	 but	 it	 becomes	 victorious.	 Love
wants	to	surrender,	but	surrender	brings	victory.
And	 the	 people	 who	 try	 to	 be	 victorious	 remain	 failures.	 They	 may	 become
victorious	in	the	eyes	of	the	world	but	that	is	not	true	victory	because	death	will
take	it	away.	True	victory	is	that	which	even	death	cannot	destroy.
Think	 of	 yourself	 as	 victorious	 only	 when	 you	 have	 gained	 something	 of
immortality.	Love	gives	you	the	first	glimpse	of	immortality,	love	opens	the	first
window	beyond	 death.	One	who	 knows	 love	 is	 bound	 to	 know	god	 sooner	 or
later,	one	just	has	to	go	on	deepening	one's	love.
Be	in	love	with	love	itself,	then	victory	is	going	to	be	yours!
Sannyas	 is	a	dance	of	bliss.	 It	 is	not	 renunciation,	 it	 is	 rejoicing.	 It	 is	not	 life-
negative,	 it	 is	a	 tremendous	 love	affair	with	 life	 itself.	 It	 is	not	 the	old	 idea	of
sannyas,	monkhood.	I	am	totally	against	the	old	idea.	It	has	poisoned	the	whole
humanity,	it	has	made	people's	lives	more	miserable.
Rather	 than	 helping	 people	 to	 be	 blissful,	 it	 has	 been	 a	 curse	 rather	 than	 a
blessing,	for	the	simple	reason	that	it	created	negativity	in	peoples'	minds:	life	is
wrong	--	if	you	want	to	achieve	god	you	have	to	renounce	it;	joys	of	life	are	not
good,	 they	 are	 temptations	 from	 the	 devil	 --	 you	 have	 to	 escape	 from	 all
temptations	of	 life.	You	have	 to	go	on	shrinking,	 shrinking,	you	have	 to	move
away	from	all	relationships,	you	have	to	live	in	a	cave	in	the	mountains	or	in	a
monastery.
It	created	so	much	 fear	 in	people	 that	people	became	pathological.	Those	who
escape,	lived	in	utter	misery.	Their	only	solace	was	that	people	thought	that	they
were	saints	and	people	respected	them	and	honoured	them.	That	was	very	ego-
fulfilling,	that	was	their	only	solace,	otherwise	there	was	nothing	in	it.
Their	life	was	like	a	desert,	with	no	greenery,	with	no	oasis	at	all.	But	it	was	a
tremendously	powerful	ego	trip.	And	people	can	do	anything	for	the	fulfilment
of	the	ego;	any	absurd	thing,	any	stupid	thing,	if	it	is	ego-fulfilling	they	are	ready
to	do	it.
And	if	you	look	into	the	history	of	monks	and	nuns	you	will	be	surprised:	in	the
name	of	religion	they	have	been	doing	such	stupid	things	all	over	the	world,	in
the	world,	that	coming	generations	are	simply	going	to	laugh	at	the	whole	idea
of	religion.	It	was	so	unintelligent,	so	stupid	and	mediocre,	in	fact	insane.
And	 the	 people	 who	 did	 not	 go	 that	 far	 also	 suffered	 because	 they	 could	 not
enjoy	 life	 with	 totality.	 They	 could	 not	 escape	 --	 they	 were	 not	 that	 extreme
either	 --	 but	 they	 could	 not	 live	 life	 with	 totality,	 with	 joy;	 their	 joy	 was
poisoned.	They	lived	in	the	world	feeling	guilty.
The	people	who	escaped	suffered	because	they	became	uprooted.	They	starved,
they	 were	 undernourished	 because	 life	 is	 a	 nourishment,	 relationship	 is	 a
nourishment.	 To	 be	 with	 people	 and	 to	 be	 in	 many	 loving	 relationships,
friendships,	 is	 an	 absolute	 necessity	 to	 make	 your	 life	 rich.	 They	 became
beggars,	 and	 the	 people	 who	 lived	 in	 life	 became	 very	 guilty;	 they	 started
thinking	they	are	sinners.	The	saints	were	those	who	had	escaped.	so	of	course,
logically,	the	people	who	were	not	capable	enough.
courageous	 enough.	 thought	 'We	 are	 not	 brave	 enough.	We	 are	 guilty	 people,
sinners,	and	we	are	going	to	suffer	in	hell.'
This	is	how	the	whole	world	has	been	dominated	by	the	wrong	kind	of	religion.
It	 is	 good	 that	 the	 modern	 is	 getting	 freer	 every	 day	 of	 all	 that	 rubbish.	 But
sometimes	it	happens	that	when	you	throw	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
rubbish	you	can	also	throw	the	diamonds.	You	can	throw	out	the	baby	with	the
bathwater	--	that	is	the	danger.
The	 old	 fools	 were	 doing	 one	 thing	 --	 they	 were	 throwing	 out	 the	 baby	 and
saving	the	bathwater.	Now	the	new	fools	can	do	this	--	they	can	throw	both,	but
both	ways	the	baby	is	gone.
My	effort	here	is	to	save	the	baby	and	throw	the	bathwater.	And	if	the	bathwater
can	also	be	used	somewhere	in	the	garden,	it	should	be	used.	There	is	no	need	to
throw	is	it	should	be	put	to	some	use.
Life	is	not	to	be	renounced	but	experienced,	lived,	loved,	because	it	is	only	at	the
innermost	 core	 of	 life	 that	 you	 will	 feel	 the	 presence	 of	 god.	 Hence	 my
sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 lovers	 of	 life,	 and	 they	 have	 to	 be	 dancers,	 singers,
musicians,	 poets,	 creators,	 because	 the	 fundamental	 of	 my	 religion	 is,	 if	 you
want	to	come	closer	to	the	creative	energy	of	existence	you	have	to	be	creators
yourself.	That's	the	only	way	to	come	close	to	the	creative	energy,	or	call	it	the
creator.
By	your	becoming	creative,	you	start	participating	in	god's	creation.
Celebrate	 --	 don't	miss	 a	 single	 opportunity	 to	 celebrate.	 Go	 on	 searching	 for
opportunities	to	celebrate.
If	you	cannot	find	them,	invent	them,	because	the	whole	point	is	celebration,	not
whether	 there	 is	 a	 real	 opportunity	 or	 a	 fictitious	 opportunity	 --	 that	 doesn't
matter.	What	matters	is	celebration	because	it	is	through	celebration	that	you	will
flower,	 that	 you	will	 come	 to	 your	 higher	 peaks	 of	 consciousness,	 sensitivity,
creativity.
It	is	the	celebrating	person	who	really	lives	others	only	die	a	slow	kind	of	death.
It	 takes	 seventy	 years	 for	 a	 few	 people	 to	 die,	 for	 a	 few	 it	 takes	 even	 longer,
eighty,	 ninety	 --	 they	 are	 slow	 diers.	 They	 don't	 know	 how	 to	 finish	 a	 job
quickly;	they	go	on	and	on,	they	go	on	dragging.	There	are	many	people	who	go
on	 dragging	 posthumously;	 they	 should	 have	 died	 decades	 ago	 but	 somehow
they	manage.	There	are	ghosts'	--
there	are	the	people	who	are	ghosts,	who	live	a	posthumous	kind	of	existence.
In	fact	it	is	near-about	the	age	of	four	that	people	die	--	then	it	is	all	posthumous
existence,	then	they	simply	go	on	dragging.	Just	look	at	a	child	of	three	and	you
will	 see	 what	 liveliness	 should	 be,	 how	 joyous	 he	 is	 and	 how	 sensitive	 to
everything	 that	 goes	 on	 happening	 around	 him,	 how	 alert,	 watchful;	 nothing
misses	his	eye.	And	how	intense	 in	everything:	 if	he	 is	angry,	he	 is	 just	anger,
pure	anger.	It	is	beautiful	to	see	a	child	in	anger,	because	old	people	are	always
half-hearted,	 even	 if	 they	 are	 angry	 they	 are	 not	 totally	 in	 it,	 they	 are	 holding
back.	They	don't	love	totally,	they	are	not	angry	totally,	they	don't	do	anything	in
totality,	 they	 are	 always	 calculating.	Their	 life	 has	become	 lukewarm.	 It	 never
comes	 to	 that	 intensity	 of	 one	hundred	degrees	where	 things	 evaporate,	where
something	happens,	where	revolution	becomes	possible.
But	 a	 child	 always	 lives	 at	 one	 hundred	 degrees	 --	whatsoever	 he	 does.	 If	 he
hates	you	he	hates	you	 totally,	and	he	 loves	you	he	 loves	you	 totally;	and	 in	a
single	moment	he	can	change.	He	is	so	quick,	he	does	not	take	time,	he	does	not
brood	over	it.	Just	one	moment	before,	he	was	sitting	in	your	lap	and	telling	you
how	much	he	loves	you.	And	then	something	happens	--	you	say	something	and
something	goes	wrong	between	you	and	him	--	and	he	jumps	out	of	your	lap	and
says	'I	never	want	to	see	you	again.'	And	see	in	his	eyes	the	totality	of	it'
And	 because	 it	 is	 total	 it	 does	 not	 leave	 a	 trace	 behind.	 That's	 the	 beauty	 of
totality:	it	does	not	accumulate	psychological	memory.	Psychological	memory	is
created	only	by	partial	 living.	Then	everything	that	you	have	lived	only	in	part
hangs	around	you,	 the	hang-over	continues	for	your	whole	life.	And	thousands
of	things	are	there,	hanging	unfinished.
That's	 the	 whole	 theory	 of	 karma,	 unfinished	 jobs,	 unfinished	 actions	 go	 on
waiting	to	be	finished,	to	be	completed,	and	they	go	on	goading	you	'Complete
me'	because	every	action	wants	to	be	fulfilled.
But	 if	 you	 live	 totally,	 intensely,	 then	 you	 are	 free	 of	 it,	 you	 have	 lived	 the
moment	and	it	is	finished.
You	don't	look	back	and	you	don't	look	ahead.	you	simply	remain	herenow,	there
is	no	past.	no	future.
That's	 what	 I	 mean	 by	 celebration.	 In	 a	 real	 moment	 of	 celebration	 only	 the
present	 exists.	And	 to	 be	 in	 the	 present	 is	 to	 be	 a	 sannyasin.	 and	 to	 be	 in	 the
present	is	to	be	blissful.
The	Golden	Wind
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007205
ShortTitle:	GWIND20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Truth	 is	 achieved	 not	 by	 thinking,	 truth	 is	 achieved	 by	 a	 state	 of	 no-thought,
because	only	when	you	are	in	a	state	of	no-thought	is	there	clarity.	Thoughts	are
like	 clouds	 around	you:	 they	make	your	 consciousness	dim,	unclear.	When	 all
thoughts	are	put	aside,	your	eyes	are	clean.	Then	there	is	nothing	to	distort	your
vision,	then	you	can	see	that	which	is	--	and	that	is	truth.
Truth	 is	 not	 a	 conclusion	 of	 mind	 but	 an	 experience	 of	 no-mind;	 hence
philosophy	 cannot	 deliver	 truth;	 only	 religion	 --	 because	 philosophy	 remains
confined	in	the	world	of	the	mind.	It	goes	on	jumping	from	one	cloud	to	another
cloud.	It	remains	in	constant	hesitation,	unclarity,	indecisiveness.
Philosophy	 is	 non-conclusive,	 it	 never	 comes	 to	 a	 conclusion;	 it	 cannot	 by	 its
very	 nature.	 It	 is	 only	 religion	 that	 can	 help	 one	 to	 see.	And	 seeing	 needs	 all
thoughts	 to	be	put	aside,	good	and	bad,	both.	Seeing	means	you	have	 to	be	as
innocent	 as	 a	 child,	 knowing	 nothing.	 In	 that	 state	 of	 not-knowing,	 knowing
happens,	real	knowing	happens.
That's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	attaining	to	clarity.
It	is	only	through	bliss	that	one	becomes	a	messenger	of	god.	The	moment	you
are	blissful	you	become	a	vehicle,	a	passage	for	god	to	descends	into	the	world.
you	become	an	opening	for	god	to	pour	into	the	world.
Every	 blissful	 person	 becomes	 a	 blessing	 to	 the	world	 because	 he	 becomes	 a
proof	 that	 god	 exists.	 There	 is	 no	 other	 proof;	 only	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 blissful
person	 is	 an	 indirect	 proof	 that	 something	more	 than	 the	mundane	 exists,	 that
something	more	than	the	so-called	life	exists.
It	is	only	through	a	man	like	Jesus	or	Buddha	or	Krishna	that	the	world	becomes
aware	that	god	cannot	be	denied.	Philosophers	have	argued	much	to	prove	god
but	they	have	not	been	able	to,	they	have	not	succeeded	at	all.	Their	whole	effort
has	 been	 an	 utter	 failure.	But	mystics	 have	 proved	 it	without	 any	 effort;	 their
presence	was	enough.
Every	 blissful	 person	 is	 a	 gabriele,	 a	messenger	 of	 god.	And	 that's	my	whole
effort	 heres	 to	 create	 as	 many	 blissful	 people	 as	 possible,	 because	 the	 world
needs	now	as	many	proofs	for	god's	existence	as	we	can	manage,	otherwise	god
is	disappearing.	The	misery	is	becoming	too	heavy	and	the	night	is	becoming	too
dark,	and	man	is	losing	all	contact	with	the	transcendental	My	sannyasins	have
to	 become	 bridges	 between	 this	 and	 that,	 between	 the	 ordinary	world	 and	 the
extraordinary	world	 --	which	 is	hidden	within	 the	ordinary.	And	 the	only	way,
and	 I	 repeat,	 the	 only	 way,	 is	 to	 become	 a	 dance	 of	 joy,	 a	 song	 of	 joy,	 a
celebration.	--	How	long	will	you	be	here?
--	Forever.
--	Be	here	forever'	All	Gabrieles	are	needed	here'	Good,	Gabriele.
Man	can	live	in	two	ways	either	he	becomes	a	stagnant	pool	of	energy	or	he	can
become	 a	 dynamic	 flow,	 a	 river	 of	 energy.	 The	 stagnant	 pool	 never	 knows
anything	 beyond	 itself	 because	 it	 never	 moves	 beyond	 its	 boundaries.	 The
stagnant	pool	of	energy	becomes	the	ego.
The	 riverlike	 flow	 helps	 you	 always	 to	 go	 beyond	 yourself.	 It	 is	 a	 constant
transcendence.	It	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
movement	 towards	 the	 oceanic,	 towards	 the	 infinite,	 towards	 the	 unbounded.
That	is	the	way	of	a	sannyasin.
the	 way	 of	 a	 meditator.	 Life	 should	 be	 like	 a	 river,	 always	 moving,	 never
clinging,	always	ready	to	go	into	the	unknown,	always	ready	to	risk	the	familiar
for	the	unfamiliar.
The	 constant	 adventuring	 consciousness	 makes	 a	 man	 a	 sannyasin.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	adventure	there	is.
And	this	 is	 the	right	 time	and	the	right	age	(she	is	fifteen)	 to	become	aware	of
this	 alternative	 possibility,	 otherwise	 slowly	 slowly	 people	 become	 so
accustomed	to	being	stagnant	that	they	forget	completely.	they	become	oblivious
that	 they	 could	 have	 been	 rivers.	 That's	 why	 people	 live	 small	 lives,	 very
ordinary,	of	no	significance	and	meaning,	of	no	joy,	of	no	surprise.	They	simply
go	on	moving	in	a	repetitive	circle.	doing	the	same	thing	again	and	again	every
day	from	birth	to	death.
That	is	not	the	right	way	to	live.	That	is	a	slow	way	of	committing	suicide.	The
right	way	 to	 live	 is	 to	 live	dangerously,	 always	exploring	and	always	 reaching
for	 the	 stars.	 Then	 life	 becomes	 naturally	 meditative	 because	 each	 moment
brings	so	much	surprise	and	each	moment	is	so	new,	you	cannot	think	anything,
you	have	to	encounter	it.
The	 repetitive	 person	 can	 think	 about	 his	 life,	 can	 plan	 his	 life,	 because	 he	 is
predictable.	Everybody	knows	what	he	is	going	to	do	tomorrow	and	the	day	after
tomorrow.	 But	 the	 meditative	 person	 is	 unpredictable;	 not	 only	 to	 others,	 to
himself	 also.	He	does	 not	 know	what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 in	 the	 next	moment;
hence	 there	 is	 no	 question	 of	 planning	 thinking.	 He	 lives	 an	 open	 life,	 he
welcomes	 every	 moment...	 fresh,	 young.	 And	 with	 that	 welcoming	 heart	 one
becomes	 aware	 slowly	 slowly	 of	 something	which	 has	 been	 called	 god,	 truth,
nirvana,	enlightenment	--	different	names	for	the	same	thing	But	the	best	name
has	been	used	by	Lao	Tzu;	he	calls	it	tao.
He	says	'It	has	no	name,	hence	I	have	chosen	an	arbitrary	name:	I	will	call	it	tao.'
He	is	very	clear	about	it.	He	says	'It	is	an	arbitrary	name,	t	has	no	name	--	I	will
call	it	tao'	Tao	means	nothing.	You	can	call	it	XYZ.
My	message	 is	 love,	my	 religion	 is	 love.	 In	 a	way	 it	 is	 very	 simple.	 it	 has	no
complexity	about	it	--	no	rituals,	no	dogmas,	no	hypothetical	philosophy.	It	is	a
very	simple	and	direct	approach	towards	life.	The	small	word	'love'	can	contain
it.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	be	constantly	 in	a	 love	affair	with	existence.	 It	 is	not	a
question	of	whom	you	love	--	it	 is	immaterial	to	whom	your	love	is	addressed.
The	 thing	 that	matters	 is	 that	you	 should	 love	 twenty-four	hours	a	day,	 just	 as
you	breathe.	As	breathing	needs	no	object,	love	needs	no	object.	Sometimes	you
are	breathing	with	a	friend	and	sometimes	you	are	breathing	by	the	side	of	a	tree
and	 sometimes	 you	 are	 breathing	 swimming	 in	 a	 pool.	 In	 the	 same	 way	 you
should	 love.	 Love	 should	 be	 your	 interior	 core	 of	 breathing,	 it	 should	 be	 as
natural	 as	 breathing.	 In	 fact	 love	 has	 the	 same	 relationship	 to	 the	 soul	 as
breathing	has	to	the	body.
The	body	 lives	 through	breathing;	once	 the	breathing	stops	 the	body	dies.	The
soul	 exists	 through	 loving,	 but	many	 people	 don't	 have	 any	 soul	 because	 they
never	 started	 loving.	 They	 only	 assume	 that	 they	 have	 souls	 --	 they	 don't
Potentially	of	course	they	do;	if	they	start	loving	it	will	become	a	reality.	Love
transforms	 your	 potential	 soul	 into	 an	 actual	 phenomenon.	 It	 is	 the	 greatest
miracle,	the	greatest	magic,	the	greatest	mystery	of	life.	there	is	nothing	higher
than	love.
But	when	 I	use	 the	word	 'love'	 I	 am	using	 it	 in	a	very	special	 sense.	 It	has	no
ordinary	connotations	to	it.
It	 is	 just	a	 loving	 relationship	 tot	he	whole,	a	 friendship	with	everything,	even
with	things	which	ordinarily	are	thought	to	be	dead.
A	Buddha	treats	even	the	chair	as	if	it	is	alive.	It	is	not	a	question	of	whether	it	is
alive	or	not;	the	point	is	that	the	Buddha	cannot	be	unloving,	so	whatsoever	he
does	 there	 is	 love.	 and	 that	 has	 to	 be	 the	 constant	 remembrance	 of	 my
sannyasins.	Remember	it	again	and	again	because	you	will	lose	track	of	love.
We	 are	 not	 prepared	 for	 it,	 the	 society	 does	 not	 prepare	 us	 for	 it	 --	 just	 the
contrary:	 it	 prepares	 us	 for	 hatred,	 ambition,	 jealousy,	 possessiveness,
domination,	 all	 kinds	of	 ego	 trips	 and	numbers.	But	 it	 doesn't	 prepare	you	 for
love.	Love	goes	against	all	these	things.	A	loving	person	cannot	be	ambitious,	a
loving	person	 cannot	 be	 egoistic,	 a	 loving	person	 cannot	 be	political,	 a	 loving
person	cannot	be	dominating,	 a	 loving	person	cannot	be	possessive.	These	 are
poisons	to	love,	they	will	kill	the	very	spirit	of	love.	A	loving	person	can	only	be
loving.	He	exists	as	love.
And	one	need	not	be	a	Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan	to	be	religious.
All	 that	one	needs	 to	be	 religious	 is	 to	be	 loving,	and	 through	 love	slowly	 the
soul	is	born.	And	you	become	aware	when	you	become	pregnant	with	soul.	It	is
just	 as	 when	 a	 woman	 becomes	 pregnant:	 she	 soon	 becomes	 aware	 of	 the
presence	of	the	child.	As	the	child	starts	growing	in	her	womb	she	knows	--	she
even	starts	feeling	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
movements	of	the	child.	she	starts	becoming	more	and	more	alert	and	aware	of
another	life	within	her.
In	exactly	 the	same	way	it	happens	when	you	become	pregnant	with	soul:	you
suddenly	start	feeling	a	new	quality	inside	your	being,	a	new	interiority,	as	if	a
door	 has	 opened	 and	 now	 you	 can	 see	 your	 innermost	 core,	 the	 very	 shrine
where	your	centre	of	life	exists.	And	it	radiates	with	light.	Slowly	slowly	it	fills
your	whole	being	with	life,	love,	light.	Then	one	is	reborn	--	then	one	is	really
born.
That's	the	goal	of	sannyas	rebirth,	resurrection.
There	 is	 a	 vast	 difference	 between	 knowledge	 and	 knowing.	 Knowledge	 is
always	borrowed	and	acquired	from	others,	knowing	is	yours.	And	that	which	is
yours	is	true,	and	that	which	is	not	yours	cannot	be	true.
Truth	cannot	be	 transferred	 --	 that	 is	one	of	 the	 intrinsic	qualities	of	 truth.	My
truth	 cannot	 become	 your	 truth.	 The	 moment	 I	 give	 it	 to	 you,	 in	 that	 very
moment	it	becomes	false.	It	is	like	uprooting	a	tree:	the	moment	you	uproot	it,	it
is	 dead.	 It	 is	 alive	 only	 when	 it	 is	 rooted.	 And	 the	 tree	 of	 truth	 cannot	 be
transplanted,	you	cannot	put	it	in	other	soil.
So	Buddha's	truth	dies	with	Buddha	and	Jesus'	truth	dies	with	Jesus.	Christianity
is	 a	 false	 phenomenon,	 so	 is	Buddhism.	 Each	 person	 has	 to	 discover	 his	 own
truth.	Learn	from	Buddha	the	possibility	of	 truth,	 learn	from	Buddha	 the	hope,
learn	from	Buddha	the	confidence	that	'Yes,	it	is	possible.	If	it	is	possible	for	one
person,	why	not	me?'	But	don't	try	to	borrow	because	whatsoever	you	borrow	is
nothing	but	words;	it	won't	have	any	meaning	in	your	life.	Meaning	comes	from
experience.
That's	 the	 difference	 between	 knowledge	 and	 knowings	 knowing	 is	 beautiful,
knowledge	is	ugly.
Knowledge	 makes	 you	 a	 scholar,	 a	 pundit;	 knowing	 makes	 you	 a	 mystic
Knowledge	never	makes	you	a	knower,	it	makes	you	knowledgeable.	Knowing
makes	you	a	knower	but	never	makes	you	knowledgeable.
And	bliss	comes	only	through	knowing.
Humanity	 now	 knows	much	more	 than	 it	 has	 ever	 known	 before;	 knowledge
goes	on	accumulating.	In	fact	you	know	more	than	Jesus.	If	you	meet	Jesus	you
can	teach	him	many	things.	He	will	not	know	a	thousand	and	one	things.	I	don't
think	he	will	be	able	to	pass	the	matriculation	examination	--	impossible!
But	 that	 does	 not	mean	 that	 he	 is	 not	 a	 knower	 --	 he	 knows,	 but	 in	 a	 totally
different	way.	His	experience	has	transformed	his	being.	He	is	not	as	informed	as
you	are	but	he	is	transformed,	and	that	is	the	real	thing.
Information	means	 nothing.	 A	 computer	 can	 have	more	 information	 than	 you
have	but	the	computer	can	never	become	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha.	Or	do	you	think	a
computer	can	become	enlightened	some	day?	That	is	impossible.
A	computer	can	know	everything	possible	but	 it	will	 remain	a	computer	and	 it
will	repeat	only	that	which	is	fed	into	it.	It	cannot	be	blissful	either	--	what	bliss
can	a	machine	have?	It	cannot	be	loving	either	--
how	can	a	machine	be	loving?	It	may	say	'I	love	you,	I	love	you	very	much,	I	am
ready	to	die	for	you'	--	it	may	say	beautiful	things,	but	they	will	be	simply	words.
It	can	be	taught	to	hug	you	and	kiss	you	but	there	will	be	no	love	at	all.	And	you
will	know	that	this	is	just	foolish	--	a	machine	kissing	you	and	hugging	you.
You	will	look	all	around,	embarrassed!
A	machine	can	be	taught	these	things	and	the	machine	can	do	these	things	very
efficiently.	 But	 millions	 of	 people	 are	 doing	 exactly	 that:	 functioning	 like
machines,	computers.	They	repeat	cliche's	--	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan	--
beautiful	words	but	all	dead.
With	me	it	is	not	a	question	of	becoming	more	informed.	I	am	not	a	teacher,	I	am
not	here	to	teach	you	anything.	I	am	here	to	help	you,	on	the	contrary,	to	unlearn
--	not	 to	 learn	but	 to	unlearn,	so	that	you	can	be	unburdened	and	you	can	start
seeing	on	your	own.
The	moment	you	start	seeing	on	your	own,	your	life	takes	a	quantum	leap	into	a
new	 dimension	 the	 dimension	 of	 eternity.	 the	 dimension	 of	 godliness,	 the
dimension	of	bliss,	truth,	freedom.
Bliss	 and	 love	 are	 two	 aspects	 of	 sannyas,	 just	 like	 two	 aspects	 of	 a	 coin,	 be
blissful	within	and	be	loving	without.
One	can	be	blissful	and	miserly	--	then	bliss	starts	dying.	It	has	to	be	shared	to
keep	it	alive	and	flowing,	to	keep	it	fresh	and	young.
The	old	 tradition	of	 the	so-called	religious	people	has	been	very	miserly;	 there
was	no	place	for	love	in	it	Of	course	they	were	all	searching	for	bliss	and	they
could	find	little	bits	of	blissfulness	here	and	there,	but	they	were	very	greedy	and
miserly.	And	 in	 their	 greed	 and	miserliness	whatsoever	 they	 found	was	killed,
destroyed,	poisoned,	hence	they	remained	sad.	All	the	old	saints	look	sad,	they
have	long	faces	--	with	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
laughter,	with	no	love,	with	no	sharing.
This	is	something	very	fundamental,	that	bliss	grows	as	you	share	it,	otherwise	it
dies.	Even	if	by	chance	you	discover	a	source	of	it,	soon	it	will	be	exhausted.	If
you	want	it	to	become	inexhaustible,	then	share,	then	share	as	much	as	possible.
And	 never	 think	 whether	 the	 other	 person	 is	 worthy	 or	 not.	 Those	 are	 the
considerations	of	a	greedy	person,	a	miserly	person.
A	person	who	wants	 to	 share	never	 thinks	whether	 the	other	 is	worthy	or	not.
Who	cares?	The	whole	point	is	to	share.	If	he	is	ready	to	share,	that's	enough.	Be
thankful	that	he	allows	you	to	share	your	joy.
The	sharing	of	bliss	is	love,	and	it	is	through	love	that	bliss	grows.	The	more	you
love,	the	more	blissful	you	become;	the	more	blissful	you	become	the	more	you
love.	They	feed	each	other,	they	help	each	other.
And	between	the	two	you	become	an	integrated	being.
Bliss	 is	 a	 fragrance.	 You	 cannot	 achieve	 it	 directly.	 You	 have	 to	 grow	 rose
bushes;	when	 the	 roses	 arrive	 there	will	 be	 fragrance	 automatically.	Bliss	 is	 a
fragrance	of	meditation.	Meditation	means	becoming	more	and	more	silent.
The	noisy	person	cannot	be	blissful	--	one	needs	the	music	of	silence.	And	our
minds	are	too	noisy.	We	are	carrying	almost	a	whole	marketplace	in	our	heads,
all	kinds	of	 rubbish.	And	we	are	not	one,	we	are	a	crowd	 inside,	many	people
and	they	are	constantly	quarrelling,	fighting	with	each	other,	trying	to	dominate.
Each	 fragment	 of	 our	mind	wants	 to	 become	 the	most	 powerful	 one.	There	 is
constant	inner	politics.	You	cannot	find	bliss	in	this	constant	inner	war.
Bliss	 is	possible	only	 if	 this	continuous	war	ceases.	And	 it	can	 cease;	 it	 is	not
very	difficult	to	get	beyond	it.	All	that	is	needed	is	awareness.	We	are	not	aware
of	this	whole	phenomenon	that	goes	on.	It	goes	on	inside	like	an	undercurrent.
We	are	almost	oblivious	of	it.	It	is	always	there,	day	in,	day	out,	but	we	are	not
conscious	of	it.
Bring	 consciousness	 to	 it.	 Slowly,	 watch	 the	 subtle	 layers	 of	 noisiness,	 and
slowly	 slowly	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 so	 much	 chattering	 that	 it	 appears
almost	as	if	a	madhouse	is	inside	the	head.	And	we	are	living	in	this	nightmare!
Through	 watching	 a	 miracle	 happens	 whatsoever	 you	 can	 watch	 starts
evaporating.	And	the	moment	 it	evaporates	you	are	 left	with	a	deep	silence.	In
the	 beginning	 there	 are	 only	 intervals,	 small	 gaps	when	 thoughts	 cease,	when
you	can	look	through	small	windows	into	reality.	But	slowly	those	gaps	become
bigger	they	start	coming	more	often,	then	they	start	staying	longer.
It	has	been	calculated	by	the	ancient	mystics,	and	I	totally	agree	with	them,	that
if	 a	 person	 can	 remain	 totally	 silent	 for	 forty-eight	 minutes	 he	 attains	 to
enlightenment,	 he	 becomes	 absolutely	 blissful.	 And	 then	 it	 lasts	 forever,	 then
there	is	no	going	back.	You	have	gone	into	the	beyond,	you	have	reached	beyond
time	and	its	constant	shifting	sands.	You	have	reached	the	rock	of	eternity.	That's
where	one	comes	to	realise	one's	immortality.
That	is	the	ultimate	target	of	sannyas.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007215
ShortTitle:	GWIND21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Religions	have	not	been	able	to	create	a	synthesis	between	bliss	and	peace.	It	has
been	one	of	 the	greatest	problems	in	 the	past,	because	they	failed	in	creating	a
synthesis	they	failed	in	creating	the	whole	man,	because	a	man	can	be	peaceful
but	if	he	is	not	blissful	his	peace	is	utter	coldness;	it	is	more	death	than	life.	It	is
the	peace	of	 a	 cemetery,	 the	peace	 that	prevails	 in	 a	grave.	 It	 is	 convenient	 to
others	but	to	oneself	it	is	suicidal.
Society	prefers	 that	kind	of	peace	because	 then	you	are	no	more	a	nuisance	 to
anybody.	Society	really	wants	you	to	be	dead,	not	alive.	The	whole	effort	is	how
to	kill	you	and	yet	use	you	as	an	efficient	mechanism.	And	society	has	succeeded
in	that:	it	has	destroyed	aliveness	and	replaced	it	with	mechanical	efficiency.	Its
whole	 interest	 is	 in	protection,	 even	at	 the	cost	of	 life.	 It	 is	more	 interested	 in
commodities	than	in	human	growth.	Hence	society	goes	on	preaching	to	people
to	be	peaceful,	to	be	obedient,	to	be	undisturbing	to	anybody,	and	it	praises	such
peace	as	if	it	is	something	divine,	something	of	ultimate	value.
But	one	call	become	peaceful	in	this	way	only	if	one	is	stupid,	 if	one	can't	see
the	cost	that	he	is	paying	for	such	a	dead	peace	which	is	not	worth	anything	at
all.	He	is	losing	his	freedom,	his	intelligence,	his	joy,	his	love,	his	whole	quality
of	being	adventurous.	His	whole	being	is	lost;	he	becomes	a	convenient	cog	in
the	wheel,	a	replaceable	part.	If	A	dies	he	can	be	replaced	by	B,	if	B	dies	he	can
be	replaced	by	D	or	C,	anybody,	because	they	are	not	individuals,	they	were	only
functionaries.	 And	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 tried	 for	 this.	 There	 has	 been	 a
conspiracy	between	the	priest	and	the	politician	to	destroy	humanity.
A	few	people	have	rebelled	against	this,	and	it	is	good	that	a	few	people	rebelled,
but	then	they	fell	into	another	extreme.	They	dropped	the	whole	idea	of	peace	as
useless,	worthless,	as	a	political	strategy	to	dominate,	and	they	were	not	ready	to
be	dominated	by	anybody.	They	chose	to	be	blissful,	joyous.	But	a	bliss	without
peace	is	feverish;	it	is	excitement	but	tiring	and	ultimately	there	is	no	fulfilment
in	it.	It	keeps	you	hot,	burning	hot;	it	gives	an	intensity	to	your	life.	And	if	this	is
the	only	possibility,	to	choose	between	a	cold	peace	and	a	hot	bliss,	then	I	will
say	choose	hot	bliss.	At	least	you	will	be	alive	--	feverish	but	alive;	you	will	go
crazy	but	you	will	be	alive!	You	are	bound	 to	go	 insane	sooner	or	 later,	but	at
least	you	will	be	alive!	If	this	is	the	only	alternative	then	I	am	all	for	bliss.	But	it
is	not	the	only	alternative;	it	is	the	other	extreme.
My	effort	here	 is	 to	create	a	higher	synthesis	 in	which	peace	and	bliss	are	 two
aspects	of	the	same	coin.
When	 a	 tremendously	 beautiful	 phenomenon	 happens:	 you	 have	 bliss	 but	 you
are	 not	 hot	 and	 you	 have	 peace	 but	 you	 are	 not	 cold.	 You	 are	 exactly	 in	 the
middle,	neither	hot	nor	cold,	If	you	compare	this	state	of	being	exactly,	precisely
in	the	middle	with	one	extreme,	cold,	then	you	can	call	it	warm;	if	you	compare
it	with	the	other	extreme	of	being	hot,	you	can	call	it	cool.	Because	it	is	exactly
in	the	middle	it	is	both	warm	and	cool	--	cool	compared	to	cold,	warm	compared
to	hot.	But	it	is	both	together:	it	is	peaceful	bliss	or	blissful	peace.
Then	your	being	is	whole,	you	are	rooted	in	wholeness.	You	are	not	partial,	you
are	not	lopsided.	It	is	not	that	you	have	chosen	one	part	at	the	cost	of	the	other;
you	have	chosen	both	in	a	higher	synthesis.	You	have	transcended	both	through
the	synthesis.	To	be	exactly	in	the	middle	of	any	two	extremes	is	transcendence	-
-	 synthesis	 and	 transcendence.	Both	 are	 there	 and	 yet	 the	 extremity	 of	 both	 is
lost.	To	know	it	is	to	know	god.	To	know	it	is	to	know	all.
If	you	repress	all	the	factors	that	destroy	peace	you	are	never	the	master	of	the
situation	because	your	whole	state	is	false:	you	are	a	slave	of	all	 that	you	have
repressed.	Repression	never	brings	mastery.	That	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental
things	to	be	understood:	repression	creates	slavery.	A	man	who	represses	sex	will
become	more	sexual,	pervertedly	sexual,	than	the	normal	sexual	human	being.
Hence	monks	and	nuns	and	all	kinds	of	repressed	people	are	more	sexual.	They
dream	 and	 they	 think	 only	 of	 sex	 and	 nothing	 else.	 There	 is	 a	 constant
undercurrent	of	sexuality	within	 them	and	they	are	afraid	of	 it.	And	they	 think
they	 represent	 humanity	 so	 they	 go	 on	 telling	 people	 beware	 of	 sex.	 It	 is	 the
greatest	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
danger,	the	greatest	temptation	of	the	devil.	It	is	a	temptation	to	them,	but	they
know	only	 themselves	and	 they	 think	 they	are	 representatives.	They	are	not	 --
they	are	perverted	people.
To	them	sex	is	the	most	tempting	thing	in	the	world	because	they	have	repressed
it	 and	 it	 is	 constantly	 hammering	 on	 their	 heart:	 'Release	 me!'	 The	 energy
becomes	 stronger	 the	 more	 you	 accumulate	 it.	 It	 continuously	 forces	 itself	 to
find	a	way	out,	and	it	is	bound	to	find	a	way	out,	if	not	from	the	front	door	then
from	 the	 back	 door.	 Then	 some	 kind	 of	 perversion	 --	 homosexuality,
lesbianism...	They	are	all	somehow	related	to	religion;	their	origin	is	in	religion.
It	 is	 the	repressive	religion	 that	has	created	 those	 things,	and	 then	 it	condemns
them.
The	whole	problem	 is	 'the	more	you	 repress'	 the	more	you	become	afraid;	 the
more	you	become	 afraid,	 the	more	 you	 repress	 and	 the	more	 you	 condemn.	 It
becomes	a	vicious	circle,	and	you	go	on	moving	faster	and	faster	in	the	vicious
circle.
The	same	is	true	about	everything.	If	you	repress	your	tensions	you	can	attain	to
a	very	superficial	peace,	but	you	will	not	be	the	master	of	it,	you	will	be	only	a
slave.	And	you	will	know	that	at	any	moment	your	peace	can	be	 lost.	 It	 is	not
even	skin-deep,	it	is	an	absolute	farce.	You	know	that	perfectly	well	because	you
have	repressed	all	 that	 is	against	 it	and	it	 is	 there,	and	it	goes	on	accumulating
energy.	Just	a	 thin	 layer	of	peace	exists	and	you	are	sitting	on	a	volcano.	How
can	you	be	a	master?
To	be	a	master	of	peace	means	you	have	not	 repressed	anything	but	you	have
tried	to	understand	everything	and	through	understanding	comes	mastery.	This	is
the	 magic	 of	 understanding:	 whatsoever	 you	 have	 understood	 rightly	 has	 no
more	any	power	over	you.
This	is	the	miracle	that	I	teach	to	my	sannyasins.	I	don't	teach	any	discipline.	I
believe	 in	magic	 rather	 than	 in	discipline.	This	 is	 the	magic:	 that	 if	 you	 try	 to
understand	anything...	If	you	try	to	understand	anger	and	if	you	come	to	a	deep
understanding	of	your	anger,	anger	disappears,	evaporates	just	like	dewdrops	in
the	 early	 morning	 sun.	 Your	 understanding	 functions	 like	 the	 rising	 sun	 and
dewdrops	 evaporate.	 You	 need	 not	 do	 anything	 --	 just	 the	 presence	 of	 an
understanding	consciousness....
And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	creating	an	integrated	consciousness	so
that	 you	 can	watch	 everything	 undisturbed,	 unprejudiced,	without	 any	 a	 priori
conclusions,	without	being	for	or	against	from	the	very	beginning	just	watching
it	 silently	 without	 any	 interpretation,	 just	 looking	 at	 anger,	 at	 jealousy	 at
possessiveness,	at	sexuality,	everything	that	disturbs	your	peace	--	and	there	are
hundreds	 of	 things.	 You	 have	 to	 use	 the	 same	 method	 --	 that	 of	 detached
observation	--	and	you	have	to	go	to	the	very	root	of	everything	unafraid.	There
is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 afraid	 and	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 be	 in	 a	 hurry;	 it	 needs	 patient
observation.
When	you	have	reached	the	very	root	of	any	problem	you	will	be	surprised:	at
that	very	moment,	when	you	touch	the	rock	bottom	of	its	causes,	it	disappears;
you	are	 finished	with	 it.	And	a	 tremendous	energy	which	was	entangled	 in	 the
problem,	which	was	imprisoned	by	the	problem	is	released.	The	more	problems
you	go	on	solving,	the	more	powerful	you	go	on	becoming.
This	 is	 how	 one	 day	 one	 becomes	 a	master.	 Then	 peace	 comes,	 but	 it	 comes
naturally,	spontaneously.
Then	it	is	not	only	a	superficial	thing,	then	it	is	your	whole	being.	And	whenever
peace	 is	 your	whole	 being,	whenever	 your	 are	 the	master	 of	 it,	 it	 brings	 bliss
with	it	automatically,	as	its	intrinsic	part.	Many	flowers	bloom.
Reach	from	any	door...	You	can	try	to	reach	through	peace,	and	bliss	will	come
and	love	will	come	and	compassion	will	come	and	a	tremendous	understanding
of	 other	 people's	 lives,	 forgiveness,	 a	 great	 humility,	 humbleness,	 egolessness,
truthfulness,	sincerity,	authenticity;	they	will	all	bloom.	Just	reach	from	any	one
angle...	 or	 try	 to	 reach	 from	 love	or	 try	 to	 reach	 from	compassion;	 it	 does	not
matter.	There	are	many	doors	 to	 the	 temple	of	god,	but	at	every	door	you	will
need	the	same	key	to	unlock	it	--	and	that	is	meditation,	that	is	awareness.	And
when	you	reach	the	temple,	suddenly	you	see	that	all	others	who	were	trying	and
working	 on	 other	 doors	 have	 also	 arrived,	 and	 you	 have	 arrived	 at	 the	 same
centre.
Jesus	and	Buddha	and	Krishna	and	Mohammed	and	Lao	Tzu	and	Zarathustra	all
meet	at	the	very	centre.
The	doors	were	so	different	and	they	were	knocking	on	different	doors	and	they
were	arguing	when	they	were	at	 the	doors	 that	 'I	am	right'	or	 'You	are	right'	or
'Who	is	 right.'	But	as	 they	enter	 inside	 they	suddenly	know	all	doors	are	right.
And	the	miracle	of	miracles	is	that	they	were	all	using	the	same	key.	The	doors
were	 different,	 the	 shape	 of	 the	 locks	 were	 different	 but	 they	 were	 using	 the
same	key.
Jesus	says	 to	his	disciples	again	and	again,	 'Beware!'	Beware	means	be	aware.
Buddha	says	to	his	disciples	continuously,	day	in,	day	out,	year	in,	year	out...	for
forty-two	years	he	was	teaching	a	single	word,
'right-mindfulness',	 another	 name	 for	 awareness.	 Krishnamurti	 simply	 calls	 it
awareness.	Gurdjieff	used	to	call	it	'self-remembering';	that	is	a	Sufi	word.	Kabir
simply	called	it	surati,	remembrance.	There	is	no	need	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
to	call	it	self-remembrance	because	when	you	are	in	a	state	of	remembrance	it	is
naturally	of	the	self,	of	the	centre.	These	are	different	words	but	they	are	for	the
same	key.
Bliss	 is	not	something	 that	can	be	added	 to	you.	 It	 is	not	an	achievement.	 it	 is
already	inside	you.	You	have	brought	it	with	your	very	life;	it	is	intrinsic	to	your
being.	It	needs	unfoldment.	It	is	like	a	bud:	just	a	little	effort	and	it	can	become	a
flower.	In	the	morning	when	the	sun	rises	buds	start	becoming	flowers.
The	same	happens	with	meditation	in	the	inner	world,	in	the	inner	garden	of	the
soul.	 As	 your	 awareness	 rises,	 awareness	 gives	 some	 inner	 warmth.	 One	 can
almost	feel	it.	When	it	starts	awakening	in	you	you	can	see	some	energy	moving
within	you,	moving	upwards	against	gravitation.	The	higher	it	comes,	the	more
you	can	feel	it.	And	as	your	inner	world	becomes	warm	and	full	of	light,	many
buds	start	becoming	flowers.
Suddenly	the	spring	is	there.
Bliss	 is	 the	 first	 flower	 to	 open	 and	 then	many	other	 things	 follow,	 as	 if	 bliss
opens	the	doors	of	the	temple.	The	first	is	bliss	and	the	last	is	the	experience	of
godliness,	and	between	the	two	there	will	be	many	many	flowers.
Love	and	prayer	are	two	expressions	of	the	same	energy.	Love	is	more	earthly,
prayer	is	more	unearthly,	but	the	experience	is	the	same.	Love	has	a	limitation	to
it;	it	is	person	to	person.	Prayer	is	unlimited,	it	is	from	a	person	to	the	impersonal
existence.	And	it	is	so,	that	it	is	from	the	person	to	the	impersonal	existence	only
in	 the	 beginning	 because	when	 you	 relate	with	 the	 impersonal	 existence	 your
person	is	lost.	It	is	like	a	dewdrop	slipping	into	the	ocean:	it	cannot	remain,	it	is
bound	to	lose	its	boundaries.	It	will	become	the	ocean.	It	is	not	losing	anything,
it	is	gaining	everything,	but	the	old	identity	will	be	gone.
But	the	problem	is,	unfortunately	very	few	people	know	what	love	is	--	what	to
say	 about	 prayer?	That's	why	 prayer	 has	 become	 almost	 non-existential.	 Even
love	is	experienced	by	very	few	people,	rare	people,	because	love	also	demands
many	essential	things	before	you	can	experience	it.	If	your	mind	is	full	of	anti-
love	attitudes	it	is	impossible	for	love	to	exist.	It	cannot	co-exist	with	jealousy,
with	possessiveness,	with	ego,	with	hatred,	with	anger;	it	cannot	co-exist.	They
arc	all	anti-love	phenomena;	they	destroy	the	very	possibility	of	love.
But	mind	 is	 very	 inventive.	 If	 he	 cannot	 find	 the	 real	 thing	he	 always	 invents
something	 plastic	 and	 befools	 himself.	Man	 is	 so	 clever	 in	 befooling	 that	 not
only	does	he	befool	others,	he	befools	himself	too.	If	he	cannot	grow	real	roses
then	he	goes	 to	 the	market	and	purchases	plastic	 flowers.	They	 look	 like	 roses
but	they	are	not	roses.	But	in	a	way	they	are	very	convenient:	you	don't	need	to
grow	 them,	you	don't	 need	 to	bother	 about	 them,	you	don't	 need	 to	 labour	 for
them,	 you	 don't	 need	 any	 patience.	 And	 moreover,	 plastic	 flowers	 are	 very
lasting;	in	fact	it	is	very	difficult	to	destroy	plastic.
Now	the	scientists	and	particularly	the	ecologists	are	very	much	disturbed	by	the
fact	that	plastic	does	not	disintegrate	into	the	earth;	it	remains.	It	is	the	only	thing
that	we	have	found	which	seems	to	be	almost	immortal!	And	it	is	creating	great
danger	to	the	whole	existence	because	all	the	riverbeds	and	the	ocean	beds	and
the	lakes	are	slowly	becoming	full	of	plastic	things.	And	because	of	those	plastic
things	 the	earth	cannot	go	on	 recycling	 itself;	 they	become	barriers.	Otherwise
everything	 disintegrates.	Man	 dies;	 you	 put	 him	 in	 the	 grave	 and	 soon	 things
start	disintegrating.	The	earth	goes	into	the	earth,	the	water	goes	into	water;	even
the	 bones	 will	 disappear	 sooner	 or	 later.	 The	 phosphorous	 will	 become
phosphorous	 and	 the	 aluminium	 will	 become	 aluminium,	 and	 everything	 will
disintegrate	 and	 go	 back	 to	 its	 original	 source.	But	 plastic	 never	 goes	 back	 to
anywhere;	it	remains.	It	stops	the	cycle	of	nature.	It	is	the	most	dangerous	thing
that	man	has	yet	brought	into	existence.	Sooner	or	later	it	is	going	to	destroy	the
whole	ecology.
And	the	thing	is	true	about	the	inner	world	on	a	far	greater	scale.	There	too	we
are	full	of	plastic	things.
To	grow	in	real	love	needs	guts;	it	is	risky,	it	is	dangerous.	Its	requirements	are
great;	 it	 demands,	 it	 challenges	 you.	 And	 you	 have	 to	 drop	 many	 things	 to
become	worthy	of	it.	The	first	thing	to	be	dropped	is	the	ego	--	and	we	cling	to	it.
We	would	like	to	have	love	with	our	ego	intact.
I	have	heard:	A	film	actress	was	getting	married	to	another	film	actor.	When	they
were	 in	 the	 court	 just	 signing	 in	 the	 magistrate's	 presence	 for	 their	 marriage
contract,	as	the	man	signed	the	woman	said	'No,	I	don't	want	this	marriage!'
The	magistrate	could	not	believe	 it.	He	said	 'What	has	happened?	Nothing	has
happened!	You	have	both	come,	you	just	signed!'
But	she	said	'I	want	to	apply	for	divorce''
And	 the	magistrate	 said	 'Can	 I	ask	what	has	happened?	 --	because	 I	was	here.
Nothing	has	happened,	not	even	a	single	word	between	you	both!'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
She	said	'Everything	has	happened.	Look,	he	has	signed	with	such	big	letters,	I
cannot	 tolerate	 it!	 He	 is	 trying	 to	 show	 his	 male	 chauvinistic	 attitude.	 I	 have
signed	just	as	one	should	sign.	And	look!'
And	really	the	magistrate	also	saw	that	he	had	signed	over	the	whole	page.
This	 is	 the	beginning	of	marriage!	But	 that's	exactly	how	it	 is.	People	may	not
sign	 so	 legibly,	 so	manifestedly,	 but	 deep	 down	 they	 are	 all	 exhibitionists,	 all
egoists.	They	are	trying	to	move	into	a	love	affair,	but	they	are	not	ready	to	drop
their	egos	at	all,	so	immediately	their	egos	start	conflicting.
For	centuries	marriage	remained	intact	because	man	had	killed	the	woman's	ego
completely.	Not	that	it	was	killed,	it	went	underground,	that's	all;	it	worked	in	an
underground	 way.	 The	 woman	 became	 very	 subtle	 in	 her	 egoistic	 demands,
hence	the	nagging	and	all	kinds	of	feminine	strategies.	She	had	to	 invent	 them
because	the	man	would	not	allow	her	ego	any	direct	expression;	she	had	to	find
indirect	ways,	but	she	had	to	show	the	man	who	the	real	master	was.	And	every
day	 in	 every	 house	 the	 whole	 problem	 is:	 who	 is	 the	 master?	 It	 is	 almost
impossible	to	decide	because	the	whole	thing	is	nonsense.
If	love	is	there	nobody	is	the	master,	love	is	the	master.	You	both	disappear	into
love.	Neither	the	man	is	master	nor	the	woman	is	master	--	love	possesses	both.
But	nobody	is	ready	for	that.	They	would	like	to	possess	love	and	the	object	of
love.	Hence	the	man	tries	to	reduce	the	woman	to	a	commodity	and	the	woman
also	tries	to	reduce	the	man	to	a	commodity,	and	they	have	both	succeeded.	So
the	woman	has	 become	only	 a	means	 for	 sexual	 exploitation	 and	 the	man	has
become	the	means	for	economic	exploitation.
The	woman	 is	 very	 loving	when	 the	 payday	 comes	 close	 by;	 then	 she	 is	 very
loving!	Once	she	has	got	hold	of	the	pay,	then	who	cares?	Then	for	twenty-nine
days	you	are	nobody!	And	 the	man	 is	very	 loving	only	when	 there	 is	a	sexual
need,	otherwise	he	is	not	interested	at	all.	Once	he	has	made	love	to	the	woman
he	 turns	 on	 his	 side	 and	 goes	 to	 sleep;	 he	 does	 not	 even	 bother	 whether	 the
woman	has	enjoyed	it	or	not,	whether	she	has	attained	any	orgasm	or	not;	 it	 is
none	 of	 his	 concern.	 His	 sexual	 tension	 is	 released,	 that's	 all	 --	 he	 used	 the
woman,	and	because	there	 is	a	disparity	between	man	and	woman,	man	comes
quickly	to	orgasm	and	the	woman	cannot	come	so	quickly.	So	almost	always	she
is	just	a	means,	she	is	not	a	partner.
She	is	being	used	and	she	knows	it,	that's	why	she	suffers.
Love	does	not	exist,	and	because	love	does	not	exist	everything	else	higher	than
love	is	impossible.
Then	people	go	to	 the	churches	and	their	prayer	 is	false.	Prayer	 is	 the	ultimate
flowering	of	love,	it	is	the	fragrance	of	love.	A	man	who	has	known	love	deeply,
intensely,	who	 has	 been	 able	 to	 drop	 his	 ego,	 jealousy,	 possessiveness	 and	 all
nonsense	 will	 naturally	 move	 towards	 prayer.	 If	 to	 love	 one	 person	 is	 so
beautiful,	how	much	more	will	it	be	to	love	the	whole	existence?	That's	prayer.
One	need	not	believe	in	god	to	be	able	to	pray.	First	one	has	to	know	prayer	then
one	 is	 bound	 to	 believe	 in	 god	 --	 but	 prayer	 comes	 first,	 god	 is	 second,
secondary.	In	the	false	world	god	comes	first;	you	have	to	believe	in	god.	That
means	plastic	--	belief	means	plastic.	And	then	you	pray;	you	are	praying	to	your
own	belief.	Then	you	can	make	a	statue	of	god	or	anything	that	you	like	--	it	is
your	 own	 toy.	 And	 you	 can	 compose	 a	 beautiful	 prayer	 or	 other	 experts,	 the
priests,	can	compose	it	or	you	can	find	it	from	the	ancient	sources	--	but	they	are
all	man-made.	The	whole	of	religion	is	man-made,	hence	it	is	false.
The	 real	 religion	 arises	 out	 of	 love,	 naturally.	 Then	 it	 is	 neither	Christian	 nor
Hindu	nor	Mohammedan.
My	sannyasins	are	neither	Hindu	nor	Christian	nor	Mohammedan.	They	belong
to	a	totally	new	vision	of	religion:	a	religionless	religion,	just	a	religiousness,	not
a	 religion	 at	 all,	 not	 a	 church	 or	 a	 dogma	 or	 a	 creed	 but	 an	 overflowing	 love
which	becomes	prayer.	And	ultimately	prayer	reveals	god	to	you.	Then	it	is	not	a
belief	--	it	is	a	revelation.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#22
Chapter	title:	None
22	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007225
ShortTitle:	GWIND22
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Mind	 is	 always	 mediocre.	 Mind	 is	 never	 bright,	 never	 brilliant.	 By	 its	 very
nature	it	cannot	be	so.	Mind	is	a	dust-collector.	Mind	means	the	past.	It	is	always
dead;	it	is	nothing	but	an	accumulation	of	memories.
And	how	can	dust	be	brilliant?	How	can	the	past	be	intelligent?	It	is	dead.	Only
the	living	can	have	the	quality	of	intelligence,	brilliance.
Meditation	 is	 bright,	 brilliant,	 original.	 Mind	 is	 always	 repetitive,	 old;	 it	 is	 a
junkyard.	Through	mind	nothing	has	been	achieved.	All	that	has	been	achieved
has	been	achieved	through	meditation	--	not	only	in	religion	but	even	in	science.
Of	 course	 in	 science	 meditation	 is	 unconscious;	 meditative	 moments	 are	 just
accidental	in	science,	but	all	the	breakthroughs	have	happened	through	intuitive
gaps.	They	have	not	come	through	the	mind	but	beyond	the	mind.
This	 is	 a	 confession	 by	 all	 of	 the	 great	 scientists;	 they	 are	 puzzled	 by	 it,	 that
whatsoever	original	contribution	they	have	been	able	to	make	is	not	really	their
own.	It	comes	from	somewhere	they	know	not.
They	are	only	vehicles,	at	the	most	mediums.	But	in	religion	meditation	is	very
deliberate	and	conscious.
Religion	 practises	 meditation.	 In	 science	 it	 is	 accidental,	 in	 religion	 it	 is
deliberate.
The	whole	effort	of	religion	is	concentrated	on	a	single	point:	how	to	help	you	to
be	meditative.	And	that	means	how	to	help	you	to	put	the	mind	aside	so	that	you
can	look	into	reality	directly,	without	mind	as	a	mediator.	If	you	look	through	the
mind,	mind	always	distorts.	You	are	never	able	to	see	that	which	is	through	the
mind.	When	the	mind	is	not	functioning	you	see	reality	as	it	is.	And	that's	what
god	is	all	about:	seeing	reality	as	it	is.
God	simply	means	that	which	is.	But	to	know	it	you	need	to	be	utterly	silent;	and
mind	 is	 a	 constant	 chatterer	 --	 mind	 is	 crazy,	 noisy.	 Silence	 is	 original,
intelligent.	Whatsoever	happens	out	of	silence	is	good,	is	beautiful,	is	divine.
Christopher	 is	 a	 very	 beautiful	 name.	 The	 ordinary	 dictionary	 meaning	 is	 a
Christian,	a	follower	of	Christ.	But	that	is	not	its	true	meaning.	Its	true	meaning
is:	one	who	carries	Christ	in	the	heart	--	he	may	be	a	Christian,	he	may	not	be	a
Christian.
Christ	himself	was	not	a	Christian.	Even	 if	he	wanted	 to	be	he	could	not	have
been	because	there	was	no	Christian	church	at	all,	there	was	no	creed,	no	dogma.
He	was	born	as	a	Jew,	he	lived	as	a	Jew	and	died	as	a	Jew.	But	he	was	a	Christ,
he	was	not	a	Christian.	His	name	is	not	Christ,	his	name	is	Jesus.	In	fact	to	call
him	 Jesus	Christ	 is	 not	 right;	Christians	 go	 on	 doing	 that.	But	 in	 the	East	we
have	 never	 done	 that.	 We	 never	 say	 Gautam	 Buddha,	 we	 say	 Gautam	 the
Buddha.	Buddha	is	not	his	name	is	only	one	of	the	Buddhas	--
Gautam;	the	Buddha.	There	have	been	many	before	him	and	there	will	be	many
after	him.	Buddhahood	is	a	quality,	a	realisation,	a	flowering.
So	 is	 Christhood:	 Jesus	 the	 Christ...	 Jesus	 Christ	 is	 not	 right.	 But	 that	 is	 a
Christian	strategy.	Their	whole	effort	is	to	make	Jesus	the	only	begotten	son	of
god.	 It	 is	 monopolistic,	 they	 want	 the	 monopoly.	 The	 very	 idea	 is	 ugly	 and
unchristian.
Everybody	can	be	a	Christ	because	everybody	is	carrying	the	seed	of	Christhood
in	his	heart.	That	is	the	meaning	of	Christopher:	a	Christ-bearer.	But	we	are	only
potential	Christs.	That	potentiality	can	be	transformed	into	an	actuality	and	then
you	don't	become	a	Christian,	you	simply	become	a	Christ,	another	Christ.	Then
Christ	becomes	equivalent	to	Buddha	--	that's	exactly	what	it	is.
The	word	 'christ'	means	 the	 crowned	 one,	 one	who	 has	 achieved	 the	 ultimate
goal	of	being	totally	conscious	--	he	becomes	the	crowned	one.	All	the	glories	of
god	are	his,	 the	whole	kingdom	of	god	belongs	 to	him;	hence	he	 is	 called	 the
crowned	one.	The	word	'buddha'	means	the	awakened	one	--	it	is	the	same.
Jainas	have	another	name	'jina';	Mahavira	the	Jina;	Jina	means	the	conqueror,	the
victorious.
These	are	different	ways	of	saying	the	same	thing:	one	who	has	arrived,	one	who
has	reached	the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
ultimate	beyond	which	nothing	exists,	one	who	has	come	home.	Call	him	Christ,
Buddha,	 Jina,	 it	 doesn't	 matter;	 these	 words	 are	 just	 words.	 Good,	 if	 you
understand	their	meaning	but	dangerous	if	you	cling	to	them	as	dogmas.
Nobody	need	be	a	Christian,	nobody	need	be	a	Buddhist.	Everybody	needs	to	be
a	Christ,	but	in	being	a	Christ	you	become	a	Buddha	and	a	Jina	at	the	same	time;
you	 can	 become	 a	Buddha,	 then	 you	 become	 a	Christ	 and	 a	 Jina	 at	 the	 same
time.	 They	 are	 different	 facets	 of	 the	 same	 truth.	 But	 the	 whole	 secret	 is	 in
becoming	more	and	more	aware,	alert.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 one	 enters	 into	 the	 world	 of	 consciousness.	 I	 don't
teach	any	creed,	I	only	help	my	people	to	be	more	conscious	of	everything	that	is
within	 and	without.	That	 contains	my	whole	 teaching:	 be	 conscious,	 be	 aware
and	 live	out	of	your	 awareness.	Let	your	 awareness	be	decisive.	Don't	 impose
any	discipline	from	the	outside;	let	it	spring	from	within,	let	it	well	up.	And	then
it	is	always	fresh,	young,	alive.
And	life	becomes	more	and	more	intense,	passionate.	It	becomes	tremendously
aflame	with	joy,	with	bliss	benediction.
Martina	means	a	loyal	spirit.	It	has	other	meanings	too	but	they	are	all	ugly.
The	most	 ancient	meaning	 is	 god	 of	war	 --	 that	 is	 an	 ugly	meaning.	God	 and
war?	--	that	doesn't	fit	at	all.	God	can	only	be	a	god	of	love,	never	of	war.
The	other	meaning	is	warlike,	a	warrior.	A	sannyasin	is	not	warlike,	he	is	not	a
warrior;	 he	 is	 not	 fighting	 with	 anybody.	 A	 sannyasin	 in	 fact	 becomes	 a
sannyasin	by	dropping	all	fights.	He	is	in	love	with	the	whole	existence	--	there
is	no	need	to	fight.	Hence	I	have	chosen	a	meaning	which	is	only	metaphorically
so.
This	is	my	choice;	this	is	one	of	the	meanings	and	not	the	more	prominent	one:	a
loyal	spirit...	because	it	has	something	to	do	with	sannyas	and	something	to	do
with	bliss	too.
A	man	can	live	life	either	as	a	no	or	as	a	yes.	If	you	live	your	life	as	a	no	you
become	a	warrior;	you	are	constantly	fighting.	Then	life	is	just	a	struggle,	a	war,
and	you	are	fighting	against	everybody	else.	Of	course	it	is	a	losing	war,	you	are
bound	to	lose.	One	cannot	win	against	the	whole;	the	whole	idea	is	stupid.
But	it	appeals	to	the	ego.	The	ego	always	wants	to	say	no.	No	is	a	nourishment
for	the	ego.
Love	wants	to	say	yes;	yes	is	a	nourishment	for	living.	And	love	and	ego	are	just
polar	 opposites:	 if	 you	 say	 no	 you	 grow	 your	 ego	 bigger	 and	 bigger,	 and	 the
more	ego	you	have,	the	less	is	the	possibility	of	love.
And	without	 love	 there	 is	no	 joy,	without	 love	 there	 is	no	music,	without	 love
there	is	no	poetry	in	life.
Without	love	life	is	a	desert.	One	can	fight	as	much	as	one	wants	but	it	is	self-
destructive.
Yes	 is	 creative,	yes	 is	 the	way	of	 the	creator,	 the	way	of	 the	 lover.	Yes	means
surrender.	If	no	means	war	then	yes	means	surrender:	surrendering	to	the	whole,
trusting	 the	 whole	 as	 a	 friend	 --	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 fight	 --	 trusting	 life	 and
existence.
The	moment	you	trust	you	can	relax,	you	can	be	in	a	let-go.	And	that's	exactly
what	 sannyas	 is:	 a	 let-go,	 an	 unburdening	 of	 all	 tensions.	 There	 is	 no	 need	 to
carry	an	unnecessary	burden.	One	can	relax	with	the	whole	and	the	whole	takes
care.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	trusting	heart.	That's	what	a	loyal	spirit	means.
Learn	to	say	yes,	learn	to	be	yes,	and	a	total	yes	--	don't	hold	back	anything	and
don't	 make	 any	 conditions	 on	 the	 yes.	 And	 you	 will	 be	 surprised:	 life	 starts
growing	 in	 leaps	 and	 bounds,	 life	 starts	 becoming	 such	 a	 splendour,	 such	 a
beauty,	such	a	grace	that	one	cannot	even	imagine	it.
Life	can	become	an	unending	ecstasy.	All	that	is	needed	on	your	part	is	to	open
your	doors	and	windows.
Say	yes	to	the	winds,	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon,	to	the	rain,	to	the	whole.
We	know	songs	which	are	composed	of	words,	but	they	are	not	real	songs.	There
are	songs	which	are	composed	of	silence	and	they	are	the	real	songs.	Once	you
have	heard	 the	song	of	silence	 then	all	 the	great	poets	 just	 look	childish.	Then
Shakespeares	and	Miltons	and	Byrons	 simply	 fade	away;	 they	are	 just	playing
with	toys.	India	--	and	I	think	it	is	only	in	India	that	it	is	so	--	we	have	two	words
for	a	poet.	One	is	kavi,	which	Can	be	exactly	translated	as	'a	poet'.	The	other	is
rishi,	 which	 is	 untranslatable.	 A	 poet	 moans	 one	 who	 composes	 songs	 with
words	and	a	rishi	is	a	poet	who	has	heard	the	song	of	silence.	And	it	is	the	rishi
who	has	really	known	the	harmony	of	existence,	who	has	seen	the	beauty	of	that
which	 is.	 And	 not	 only	 has	 he	 seen	 it	 --	 because	 the	 only	way	 to	 see	 it	 is	 to
become	it	--	he	has	become	it,	it	is	his	own	heartbeart.
You	have	 to	 go	 deep	within	 yourself	 to	 hear	 the	 song	of	 silence.	You	have	 to
leave	all	words	far	away,	far	behind.
The	 greatest	 barrier	 is	 that	 of	words.	You	 can	 enter	Russia	 because	 they	 have
only	an	iron	wall;	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
China	is	even	easier	--	they	have	only	a	bamboo	wall.	But	the	real	problem	arises
when	you	try	to	enter	yourself.	And	the	wall	 is	very	delicate.	It	 is	not	made	of
steel,	it	is	not	even	made	of	bricks;	it	is	only	made	of	words,	but	a	thick	jungle	of
words	 --	Christian,	Hindu,	Mohammedan	 --	millions	of	words.	And	when	you
start	penetrating	yourself	you	go	on	finding	words	and	words	and	words.
The	meditator	has	to	go	on	peeling	himself	like	an	onion.	Peel	one	layer,	another
layer	comes	up,	but	go	on	peeling	till	you	come	to	the	point	where	nothing	is	left
in	 your	 hand.	 So	 go	 on	 peeling	 within	 yourself;	 when	 nothing	 is	 left	 ,	 that
nothing	is	the	song	of	silence.
Once	hoard	it	transforms	your	life.	You	go	beyond	time,	you	become	deathless.
All	fear	disappears	and	there	is	only	freedom.	All	misery	disappears	and	there	is
only	rejoicing	and	celebration.
The	only	victory	worth	calling	victory	is	to	become	absolutely	blissful.	Not	even
a	trace	of	misery	should	be	left,	because	if	even	a	trace	of	misery	is	left	it	will
grow	 again.	 It	 is	 like	 cancer:	 if	 even	 a	 small	 piece	 of	 some	 canceric	 growth
remains	inside	you	it	will	start	growing	again.	It	has	to	be	totally	removed.
And	misery	is	cancer	of	the	soul.	Bliss	is	the	health	of	the	soul.	Just	as	there	is	a
well-being	of	the	body,	there	is	a	well-being	of	the	soul.
To	attain	to	that	well-being	is	real	victory.	It	cannot	be	purchased	with	money,	it
cannot	be	conquered	by	power;	the	only	way	to	it	is	through	becoming	more	and
more	 silent	 and	 watchful.	 These	 two	 things	 have	 to	 be	 remembered:	 become
calm,	 silent	 and	watchful.	 Just	go	on	watching	what	goes	on	happening	 inside
you	--	the	thoughts,	the	emotions,	the	sentiments.	Just	go	on	watching	the	whole
procession	of	 all	kinds	of	 things	within	you,	without	 in	any	way	 stopping	 that
procession,	without	creating	any	fight	with	it,	without	any	interference.
It	is	just	like	you	are	sitting	on	the	bank	of	a	river	and	the	river	flows	by;	you	are
not	doing	anything	just	sitting	on	the	bank,	watching	the	river	watch	the	river	of
your	mind,	sitting	silently,	doing	nothing.	And	a	miracle	happens	one	day:	you
are	sitting	there	doing	nothing	and	the	river	disappears.	When	it	happens	for	the
first	 time	 one	 cannot	 believe	 one's	 eyes;	 one	 looks	 around	 and	 there	 is	 not	 a
single	 thought.	One	 starts	 feeling	 afraid,	 scared	 --	where	has	 all	 that	 company
gone?
That	first	shock	makes	you	feel	like	you	are	dying	because	that's	what	you	had
always	 known	 as	 your	 life.	Your	 very	 identity	 has	 disappeared	 as	 if	 the	 earth
beneath	your	feet	has	suddenly	disappeared:	you	look	and	there	is	no	earth	and
you	are	falling	into	an	abyss.	But	soon	--	and	you	cannot	do	anything	you	have
to	go	on	falling,	there	is	nothing	to	do	--	soon	you	start	feeling	a	great	joy	instead
of	 fear.	The	shock	disappears,	 and	 instead	of	 the	 fear	a	great	 joy	arises	 in	you
because	now	for	the	first	time	there	is	space	for	the	joy	to	happen.	It	needs	space,
and	 thoughts	 are	occupying	your	 inner	 space	 so	much	 that	 it	 is	 impossible	 for
bliss	to	happen.
My	sannyasins	have	to	do	only	one	thing,	that	is,	they	have	to	become	watchers
of	the	mind,	not	controllers,	just	watchers.	and	then	allow	the	process	to	take	its
own	course.
Whenever	you	have	time,	just	sit	silently	and	watch	with	no	motive.	Don't	wait
for	 any	 result,	 don't	 think	 that	 now	 great	 light	 will	 arise	 or	 a	 one-thousand-
petalled	lotus	will	open	inside	you	and	chakras	and	the	energy	will	rise	upwards.
Don't	be	worried	about	these	things.	Even	if	they	happen,	watch	them;	they	are
part	of	the	mind.
Everything	that	you	can	watch	is	part	of	the	mind	--	that's	the	very	key	to	unlock
the	door.	Everything	 that	can	be	watched	 --	kundalini	arising,	 lotuses	opening,
beautiful	fragrances	and	light	inside...	all	can	be	watched,	so	that	simply	means
they	 are	 subtle	 processes	 of	 thought.	 Mind	 is	 playing,	 trying	 to	 play	 its	 last
tricks,	trying	to	enchant	you	that	'Look,	what	are	you	doing?	Trying	to	drop	me?
I	can	supply	such	a	good	circus	and	I	contain	so	many	mysteries.	What	are	you
doing?	Trying	 to	go	beyond	me?	Then	watch	 this	 light,	watch	 this	 energy	and
see:	your	third	eye	is	opening.	These	are	all	tricks	of	the	mind,	subtle	tricks.
One	has	to	remain	absolutely	unaffected.
Those	are	the	real	temptations.	There	is	no	devil	other	than	the	mind.	If	one	can
go	 on	watching	 and	 enjoying	 these	 temptations:	 'Yes,	 you	 go	 on	 playing	 your
tricks	 --	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 watch,	 I	 will	 watch	 everything.	 I	 will	 watch	 even
nothing...'	Because	that	is	the	final	and	ultimate	strategy.	The	mind	says
'Okay,	you	are	 interested	 in	nothing?	Have	 it!'	 If	 you	cling	 to	nothing	you	are
back	in	the	mind;	the	mind	has	conquered	you,	you	have	been	defeated.
So	you	say	'Okay,	I	will	even	watch	nothing.	I	am	not	going	to	be	entangled	in
anything	 again,	 even	 by	 nothing.'	 And	 then	 the	 real	 nothing	 happens;	 it	 is	 no
more	 a	 thought.	You	don't	 see	 it,	 you	 can't	 hold	 it,	 you	 can't	 touch	 it.	All	 has
disappeared;	 even	 the	 idea	 of	 nothing	 is	 no	more	 there.	You	 are	 not	 feeling	 a
great	joy,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
'Look,	now	I	have	achieved	nothing.	That's	what	happens	when	a	man	becomes	a
Buddha.'	Even	that	is	not	there;	hence	Buddha	says	'If	you	meet	me	on	the	way,
kill	me	immediately.'	That's	what	he	means:	even	if	you	come	to	the	idea	'Now	I
have	become	the	Buddha'.	kill	it	immediately.	That	is	the	last	temptation	of	the
mind.
Go	on	watching	 and	watching	 and	watching	 till	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	watch,	 not
even	nothing	to	watch.
Then	the	watcher	is	left	alone,	then	there	is	no	object,	when	subjectivity	is	left
alone,	in	that	absolute	silence	is	the	revolution.
Love	is	not	something	static,	 it	 is	dynamic.	It	 is	not	a	stagnant	pool,	 it	 is	not	a
pond.	 It	 is	 a	 river,	 always	 flowing.	 The	 moment	 you	 stop	 a	 river,	 it	 starts
becoming	dirty.	It	is	pure	and	clean	only	in	flowing.	And	the	same	is	true	about
love:	love	should	be	a	constant	flow.	But	our	minds	are	always	trying	to	make	it
something	static.
We	are	clingers.	We	try	to	make	love	also	something	permanent.	We	destroy	all
possibilities	of	change.
We	 are	 afraid	 of	 change.	We	 are	 afraid	 that	 if	 something	 changes	who	 knows
where	that	change	will	lead?
So	we	want	our	tomorrow	to	be	exactly	like	today.	That	is	trying	to	destroy	the
future	and	that	is	trying	to	destroy	all	possibilities	of	growth.
Tomorrow	should	be	tomorrow,	never	today.	You	should	not	expect	it	to	be	the
same.	That	 very	 expectation	 is	 dangerous	because	 in	 the	 first	 place	 it	 is	 never
going	 to	 be	 so;	 hence	 you	 feel	 frustrated.	 And	 if	 by	 chance,	 by	 accident	 it
happens	 to	be	 just	 like	 today,	 then	you	will	be	bored,	but	neither	 frustration	 is
joy	nor	is	joy.
Let	 the	 future	 be	 open.	 Don't	 put	 any	 expectations	 on	 it.	 Leave	 it	 unknown,
unpredictable	and	don't	try	in	any	way	to	make	things	permanent.	The	nature	of
life	is	change,	and	we	have	to	flow	with	nature,	with	tao,	with	the	ultimate	law
of	existence.
Be	in	tune	with	it	without	any	expectation	on	your	part	and	you	will	be	enriched
--	 tremendously.	Each	moment	will	 bring	 new	 joy,	 new	 life,	 new	 light,	 a	 new
god.	And	a	person	whose	love	is	always	flowing	and	who	is	never	confined	by
anything	becomes	vast,	as	vast	as	the	sky	itself.	In	that	vastness	one	knows	what
god	is.	That	vastness	is	god.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007235
ShortTitle:	GWIND23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
One	 can	 help	 others	 only	 if	 one	 has	 come	 to	 realize	 one's	 ultimate	 nature;
otherwise	oneself	remains	in	darkness.	He	cannot	help	anybody.	He	can	wish	to
but	his	wishes	will	remain	unfulfilled.	He	can	intend	to	but	all	his	intentions	will
be	just	an	utterly	futile	exercise.	He	will	not	help	others,	on	the	contrary	he	will
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
harm	 them.	 It	 is	 not	 a	 question	of	 good	wishes,	 it	 is	 a	 question	of	 being	 fully
alert,	conscious.	When	you	are	conscious	you	cannot	harm	even	if	you	want	to;
it	 is	 impossible.	And	 the	same	 is	 true	 if	you	are	unconscious;	you	cannot	help
even	if	you	want	to.
The	unconscious	mind	goes	on	harming	because	it	is	unconscious.	Whatsoever	it
does	comes	out	of	darkness,	confusion,	unclarity.	How	can	it	be	a	help?
So	the	first	thing	is	to	be	a	meditator	because	it	is	through	meditation	that	your
inner	being	will	become	full	of	light,	full	of	bliss,	full	of	peace.	You	will	attain	to
clarity,	and	out	of	 that	clarity	whatsoever	comes	is	virtue,	 is	service,	 is	 love,	 is
compassion.
Hence	I	don't	tell	my	sannyasins	to	be	servants	of	the	people.	I	don't	want	them
to	become	helpers	of	mankind.	That	kind	of	religious	person	has	existed	for	at
least	five	thousand	years	on	the	earth;	he	has	not	helped	anybody	--	he	has	not
helped	 even	 himself.	 In	 fact,	 so	 much	 mischief	 has	 happened	 through	 these
religious	missionaries,	helpers	of	mankind,	public	servants,	that	it	is	impossible
to	conceive	any	other	source	which	has	been	more	poisoning,	more	mischievous
than	 religion.	 More	 wars	 have	 happened	 through	 it,	 more	 murder,	 more
perversion,	 insanity.	 The	 whole	 history	 is	 full	 of	 the	 nuisance	 that	 the
benefactors	of	mankind	have	forcibly	imposed	upon	it.	And	the	root	cause	was
simple;	the	root	cause	was	they	were	trying	to	do	something	of	which	they	were
not	capable.
If	you	want	to	fly	in	the	sky	you	will	need	wings,	and	just	to	provoke	you	to	fly
without	creating	wings	is	dangerous.	You	will	kill	yourself.	The	greater	danger	is
that	you	may	kill	others	--	you	may	fall	upon	somebody!	The	roads	are	crowded;
everywhere	people	are	moving.	You	have	the	right	to	kill	yourself	but	you	have
no	right	to	kill	anybody	else.
It	happens	sometimes	when	people	take	LSD	or	marihuana	that	they	start	feeling
they	can	fly.	One	woman	did	it	from	a	thirty-five	story	building	--	she	just	flew
out!	She	killed	at	least	eight	persons.	Because	of	her	there	was	an	accident;	the
whole	of	the	traffic	was	jammed.	She	killed	herself,	but	that	was	her	right.
But	 these	 eight	 persons	 were	 unnecessarily	 killed	 just	 because	 some	 stupid
person	got	the	idea	to	fly.
That's	what	has	been	happening	to	religious	missionaries.	Religion	can	function
like	an	opium,	it	can	give	you	great	dreams,	desires,	ambitions	to	do	this,	to	do
that,	without	being	aware	whether	you	are	capable	of	doing	them.	Do	you	have
the	wings?
My	effort	here	is	just	to	give	you	wings;	then	it	is	up	to	you.	If	you	want	to	fly,
fly;	if	you	don't	want	to	fly	then	there	is	no	need.
So	let	meditation	be	the	whole	center	of	your	sannyas.	And	out	of	it	everything
beautiful	comes	for	you,	for	others.	Through	meditation	one	can	really	become
Alexander	 the	Great.	 The	 only	 thing	 that	was	missing	 in	 him	was	meditation;
hence	he	was	not	great,	and	he	was	not	Alexander	either.	So	don't	repeat	that	old,
foolish	 man's	 pattern.	 He	 was	 one	 of	 the	 great	 leaders	 of	 your	 so-called
humanity.	 History	 is	 full	 of	 such	 fools!	 They	 tried	 their	 best,	 but	 because
basically	 they	 were	 unconscious	 they	 created	 more	 misery	 in	 the	 world	 than
there	was	already.	They	only	helped	man	to	become	more	miserable.
It	is	time	that	we	be	finished	with	all	that	nonsense.	Nobody	needs	to	be	a	public
servant	or	 a	helper;	 those	are	all	 ego	 trips.	 If	you	are	 silent,	peaceful,	blissful,
loving,	then	it	is	a	natural	outcome;	you	need	not	make	any	effort	for	it.	It	is	just
a	fragrance.
Your	 flower	 has	 blossomed,	 mm?	 --	 there	 is	 going	 to	 be	 fragrance.	 And
whosoever	is	capable,	sensitive	enough,	will	be	benefited.
Mind	 is	 incapable	 of	 knowing	 the	 truth.	 It	 can	gather	 all	 kinds	 of	 information
about	truth,	but	to	know	about	truth	is	not	to	know	truth.	To	know	about	love	is
not	to	know	love.
To	know	love	one	needs	to	be	a	lover.	No	information	can	be	of	any	help;	one
has	 to	go	 into	 the	experience	 itself.	And	 the	 same	 is	 true	about	 truth.	You	can
know	all	 the	great	philosophers	of	 the	world,	you	can	accumulate	great	words,
theories,	hypotheses	and	you	can	come	to	certain	arbitrary	conclusions	of	your
own.	 But	 remember,	 they	 are	 arbitrary	 because	 they	 are	 not	 rooted	 in	 your
experience.	So	whatsoever	you	know	will	really	hinder	your	search.
That	is	the	greatest	danger	in	knowledge:	it	can	give	you	a	false	notion	that	you
know.	And	once	 that	wrong	 idea	 enters	 in	you	 that	 "I	 know,"	 then	 the	 inquiry
stops.
One	has	to	know	that	one	knows	not.
One	has	to	put	aside	all	information	for	and	against,	theistic,	atheistic,	Christian,
Hindu,	Mohammedan,	religious,	philosophical.
One	has	 to	put	aside	every	kind	of	knowledge	--	knowledge	as	such.	Then	 the
inquiry	 begins.	 Then	 one	 becomes	 a	 true	 seeker	 of	 truth	 because	 then	 one	 is
open.	Out	of	that	state	of	not-knowing,	one	day	the	great	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
blessing	happens	that	one	comes	to	experience	truth,	to	live	it;	one	becomes	it.
That	is	the	state	called	enlightenment,	nirvana.	In	the	West	they	have	called	it	the
state	of	Christ-consciousness,	in	the	East	we	have	called	it	the	state	of	Buddha-
consciousness,	but	it	is	the	same.
By	becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 taking	 a	 jump	 from	mind	 to	 no-mind,	 from
knowledge	to	innocence.
And	once	innocence	is	there	everything	else	follows.
Any	coward	can	be	miserable,	Misery	needs	no	courage,	 it	needs	no	risk.	 It	 is
cheap,	 easily	 available;	 even	 if	 you	 don't	 seek	 it,	 it	 will	 seek	 you.	 And	 it	 is
everywhere,	 all	 around;	 you	 can	 just	 kick	 it	 up	 from	 any	 place.	 It	 is	 not	 like
diamonds,	that	you	have	to	go	to	certain	mines	and	dig	it	out.	The	whole	earth	is
covered	with	it	because	every	human	being	is	carrying	such	a	load	of	misery	that
you	can	get	it	from	anybody.
But	 bliss	 needs	 courage,	 great	 courage.	 The	 first	 courage	 is	 not	 to	 follow	 the
crowd,	otherwise	you	will	remain	miserable	because	they	are	all	miserable.	But
they	have	a	certain	power,	the	power	of	numbers.	They	are	many	millions;	they
can	 crush	 you,	 they	 can	 kill	 you.	 And	 they	 don't	 like	 anybody	 being	 an
individual;	they	want	you	to	be	just	like	a	sheep.	They	want	you	to	follow	their
ideology,	 their	 conventions,	 their	 religion,	 their	 culture.	 They	 don't	 leave	 the
decision	 to	you,	 they	decide	 it	 for	you.	Every	crowd	 is	dictatorial,	 totalitarian.
Every	 crowd	 is	 against	 freedom,	 against	 individuality,	 against	 truth,	 against
everything	that	is	valuable.
So	the	first	courage	is	to	be	an	individual,	not	to	follow	the	fools.	Just	because
there	are	millions	of	them	does	not	mean	that	they	are	right;	in	fact,	they	cannot
be	right	because	there	of	millions	of	them.
Truth	 is	 a	 rare	 experience;	 it	 has	 happened	 only	 to	 a	 few	people	 in	 the	whole
history	of	humanity.	God	has	been	experienced	only	by	a	few	people;	they	can
be	counted	on	one's	fingers.
The	second	courage	is	to	drop	all	that	creates	misery	in	you,	It	may	be	that	we
have	become	very	much	accustomed	to	it	and	we	may	not	be	aware	that	it	is	the
cause	of	our	misery.	Sometimes	we	even	now	that	this	is	the	cause	of	our	misery,
but	we	are	not	courageous	enough	to	drop	it	because	we	have	lived	so	long	with
it	that	it	has	become	almost	our	identity.
For	example,	everybody	knows	jealousy	 is	a	cause	of	great	misery	but	nobody
seems	to	be	able	to	drop	it.	Everybody	suffers	again	and	again	but	still	learns	no
lesson.	Every	person	is	trying	to	do	the	impossible:	they	are	trying	to	be	blissful
with	their	 jealous	mind,	with	their	possessiveness.	Now	that	 is	 impossible,	 that
cannot	happen	in	the	nature	of	things,	nobody	can	make	it	happen.	It	has	never
happened	and	it	is	never	going	to	happen.	And	the	sooner	a	person	realises	it,	the
better,	 otherwise	 his	 whole	 life	 will	 be	 wasted.	 And	 millions	 of	 people	 are
wasting	their	life:	they	go	on	remaining	jealous,	possessive,	dominant,	and	they
go	on	suffering,	but	they	never	look	at	the	causes.	Even	if	you	tell	them	to	look
at	 the	causes	 they	may	nod	 their	heads,	but	not	 really.	They	may	 say	 'Yes'	we
know,	but	that	is	superficial;	at	the	next	opportunity	they	are	jealous	again.	They
don't	 see	 the	 connection	 between	 the	 cause	 and	 the	 effect;	 they	 think	 it	 is
something	else	that	is	causing	misery.
If	somebody	insults	you	and	you	suffer	you	think	it	is	because	he	insulted	you.
'If	he	had	not	insulted	me	I	would	have	been	perfectly	happy,	so	he	is	the	cause	-
-	he	should	not	have	insulted	me.'	But	now	you	are	in	an	impossible	cul-de-sac.
You	cannot	move	 a	 single	 inch	 this	way;	 there	 is	 no	go	because	how	can	you
manage	it	so	that	the	whole	world	decides	never	to	insult	you.	It	is	not	that	he	is
causing	your	misery,	 it	 is	your	ego,	and	ego	 is	very	 touchy.	Ego	may	not	have
meant	to	insult	you,	he	may	not	even	be	aware	that	he	has	insulted	you.	He	may
be	just	joking	or	he	may	have	just	made	an	innocent	remark	not	in	any	deliberate
way	 to	hurt	you.	But	your	ego	 is	 touchy;	 it	 feels	hurt	by	anything.	Unless	one
drops	the	ego	one	will	remain	miserable.
So	 one	 has	 to	 look	 for	 causes	 inside	 oneself.	 That	 is	 very	 basic	 if	 one	 really
wants	to	go	through	a	revolution.	If	one	really	wants	to	be	blissful	one	day,	these
are	 the	basics.	The	first:	always	remember	 that	somehow	or	other	you	must	be
responsible.	Whatsoever	happens	to	you,	you	are	responsible.	If	this	basic	truth
is	remembered	you	will	be	able	to	find	the	cause.	Never	throw	the	responsibility
on	 anybody	 else.	 The	 others	 may	 just	 have	 caused	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 your
inner	misery	was	triggered;	they	were	just	excuses.	If	A	was	not	going	to	be	the
excuse	then	B	would	have	been,	C	would	have	been.	This	world	is	big	enough:	if
you	are	carrying	the	cause	within	you	then	something	or	other	is	going	to	happen
which	will	help	you	to	become	miserable.	Better	to	drop	the	cause	and	then	there
is	nobody	who	can	create	misery	for	you.
Jean-Paul	Sartre	has	a	very	famous	statement:	'The	other	is	hell.'	That's	the	idea
of	almost	everybody	in	the	world,	except	for	a	few	Buddhas:	'The	other	is	hell.'	I
cannot	 agree	 with	 him,	 although	 it	 is	 the	 experience	 of	millions	 of	 people.	 It
looks	absolutely	right	but	it	is	not	right,	not	at	all,	not	even	an	iota	of	truth	in	it.
It	is	always	you.	You	can	be	hell,	you	can	be	heaven	--	it	is	always	you,	it	is	your
decision.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Sannyas	moans	a	decision	that	'Now	I	am	going	to	create	my	own	heaven.'	And
heaven	is	not	somewhere	else;	you	have	to	create	it	just	as	you	create	hell.	It	is	a
psychological	 state.	And	once	you	know	 that	you	 are	 the	 creator	 there	 is	great
freedom;	immediately	you	are	free.	If	the	other	is	responsible	you	are	not	free;
you	are	always	in	bondage	because	the	other	can	always	create	misery	for	you	or
can	create	happiness	for	you.	In	both	ways	you	are	dependent,	and	nobody	likes
dependence.
You	have	a	beautiful	name.	How	long	are	you	going	to	stay?
If	sometime	you	decide	to	stay	forever	I	will	have	to	change	your	name	because
in	India	it	is	a	dangerous	word.	Gunda	means	hooligan.
What	do	you	call	 it?	 'Hooligan'	 in	German?	All	Germans	are	hooligans!	Adolf
Hitler	is	a	gunda!
So	 if	 some	 day	 you	 decide	 to	 stay	 then	 tell	me	 --	 I	will	 have	 to	 change	 your
name.	Otherwise	you	will	 say	 to	 somebody	 'My	name	 is	Gunda'	 and	 they	will
start	laughing.	But	for	a	few	days	it	is	okay....	And	think	of	coming	forever'
One	 can	 live	 in	misery	 and	 one	 can	 have	 all	 the	wealth	 of	 the	world,	 all	 the
power	 that	 the	world	can	confer	upon	one,	but	 still	one	will	not	be	victorious.
There	 is	 only	 one	 victory	 and	 that	 is	 attaining	 inner	 bliss.	 Even	 our	 so-called
great	 conquerors	 are	 just	 fools	who	have	wasted	 their	 lives	 and	other	 people's
lives.
The	wise	man	will	not	waste	a	single	moment	 in	anything	else.	His	whole	 life
will	 be	 a	 concentrated	 effort	 to	 attain	 blissfulness.	And	 there	 are	many	 things
behind	it.	Unless	you	attain	bliss	you	will	have	to	come	back	again	and	again	to
the	body;	you	will	have	to	be	born,	you	will	have	to	go	through	the	whole	of	life
and	 death.	 Life	 is	 like	 a	 school:	 if	 you	 fail	 you	 have	 to	 go	 back	 to	 the	 same
school	 again;	 if	 you	 pass	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to.	 That's	why	 buddhas	 never
come	 back.	 Once	 a	 man	 has	 become	 awakened	 he	 never	 comes	 back	 to	 the
world.	Then	he	 lives	 in	eternity,	 in	a	bodiless	 immortality.	He	becomes	part	of
the	whole;	he	becomes	oceanic,	vast.
The	body	is	a	confinement,	it	is	an	imprisonment.	I	am	not	against	the	body,	but
it	 has	 a	 limitation.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful	 house	 but	 very	 small	 --	 cosy	 because	 it	 is
small!	It	is	so	small	really	that	nobody	else	can	enter.
You	 cannot	 invite	 anybody	 'Sometime	 come	 inside	 me'	 --	 impossible.	 People
try...	and	they	all	fail.	That's	what	lovers	go	on	doing	all	over	the	world:	 try	to
enter	each	other,	but	it	never	succeeds.	Soon	they	have	to	recognise	that	this	is
not	possible;	 then	 there	 is	 frustration.	The	whole	 effort	 of	 lovers	 is	 to	become
part	of	each	other,	and	because	it	fails	they	feel	frustrated	and	angry.	But	they	are
trying	to	do	something	stupid.
The	house	is	so	small,	it	is	a	miracle	how	it	contains	even	a	single	person.	That's
why	everybody	feels	suffocated;	to	be	in	the	body	is	a	kind	of	suffocation.	And	a
thousand	and	one	problems	...	and	then	old	age	comes.	If	you	want	to	know	all
the	problems,	read	Buddha	--	he	is	an	expert	in	describing	all	the	problems	of	the
body'	He	 starts	 from	 the	very	beginning	 in	 the	womb,	with	 those	nine	months
that	he	thinks	are	a	great	confinement.	In	a	way	he	is	right.	To	live	in	a	woman's
womb	cannot	be	much	of	a	paradise!	It	can	only	be	compared	with	hell,	with	all
the	urine	and	the	shit	and	everything	(much	laughter)	...	and	one	has	to	live	in	it
for	nine	months!	Buddha	calls	it	a	great	suffering.	So	ho	starts	from	there,	saying
that	birth	is	a	suffering.
To	be	in	a	womb	is	a	suffering.	Then	birth	is	a	suffering	because	to	pass	from	the
birth	canal	is	really	a	suffering	because	the	canal	is	too	small	and	the	child	has	to
come	out	somehow;	it	is	like	a	tunnel.	The	child	suffers	and	the	mother	suffers.
And	growing	is	not	very	beautiful	either...	and	then	the	frustrations	of	life,	and
then	old	age	and	diseases	and	illnesses...	And	they	go	on	and	on	till	you	die;	then
there	is	the	last	misery.
It	is	good	that	in	India	people	thought	of	rebirth.	If	you	are	born	in	a	Christian
country	 or	 a	Mohammedan	 or	 a	 Jewish	 country	 then	 you	 have	 to	 live	 in	 the
grave	for	eternity.	Then	the	last	day	of	judgement	will	come.	Just	think	of	that:
living	 in	 a	 grave	 and	waiting	 for	 the	 judgement!	 If	 Buddha	 had	 known	 about
Christianity	and	Judaism	and	Mohammedanism	...	he	was	not	aware	of	them	at
all,	otherwise	he	would	have	said	that	this	is	the	last	misery.	Even	death	doesn't
end	your	misery;	 it	 is	 the	beginning	of	a	new	misery.	Now	living	in	 the	grave,
tossing	and	turning	and	nothing	to	do....
The	body	is	a	confinement,	hence	the	whole	effort	of	meditation	is	to	give	you
an	 experience	 of	 bodilessness,	 of	 going	 beyond	 the	 body,	 of	 feeling	 your
consciousness,	 of	 knowing	 it.	 To	 know	 consciousness	 is	 to	 know	 something
'limited'	unbounded,	the	infinite.
And	with	that	comes	bliss,	with	that	comes	benediction.	That	is	the	only	victory;
everything	else	is	a	fool's	paradise.
So	make	it	a	point	that	this	life	you	have	to	learn	the	lesson	so	there	will	be	no
need	to	come	back	again.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
And	if	my	sannyasins	are	really	trying	to	understand	and	live	what	I	am	saying
to	them,	not	a	single	sannyasin	need	come	back.	And	the	moment	you	become
part	of	eternity,	deathlessness,	timelessness,	you	are	victorious.
Lorraine	 (her	 name)	 has	 another	 meaning	 also:	 immortality.	 It	 is	 a	 beautiful
word.	It	represents	two	things	--	victory	and	immortality.	They	are	synonymous:
to	know	that	one	is	immortal	is	to	be	victorious.
Man	tries	to	be	famous,	but	that	is	not	true	fame.	True	fame	comes	not	by	man's
effort	to	be	famous,	it	comes	through	surrendering	oneself	totally	to	the	whole.
Then	man	 is	no	more	 there;	 then	man	becomes	 just	a	hollow	bamboo	and	god
starts	 flowing	 through	 it.	Then	 the	hollow	bamboo	 is	 turned	 into	a	 flute.	Great
song	is	born,	great	music,	but	it	is	not	human	--	it	is	divine.
All	bliss	is	divine.	And	when	one	is	full	of	bliss,	when	bliss	is	pouring	out	from
every	 nook	 and	 corner	 of	 existence,	when	 you	 are	 showered	with	 bliss,	when
you	are	no	more;	then	only	can	it	be	possible.	You	are	a	block;	the	ego	is	like	a
rock.	Remove	the	rock,	and	the	doors	of	the	temple	of	god	are	open.
Then	one	shines	with	fame,	but	it	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	fame.	A	Christ	is
famous,	but	in	a	different	way	than	Adolf	Hitler,	A	Buddha	is	famous,	but	in	a
different	way	 than	Alexander.	Alexander,	Adolf	Hitler,	 Joseph	Stalin,	Mao	Tse
Tung,	 their	 fame	 is	 nothing	 but	 ego	 pretending	 to	 be	 very	 significant	 and
important.	 The	 ego	 glitters,	 but	 all	 that	 glitters	 is	 not	 gold.	 The	 real	 god	 has
nothing	to	do	with	gold.
The	real	gold	is	created	in	you	when	you	are	capable	of	dropping	the	ego,	dying
to	 the	 ego.	 When	 you	 start	 feeling	 a	 nobody,	 a	 nothingness,	 then	 you	 start
shining	with	 fame.	But	 that	 is	god's	 fame,	god's	glory.	Then	 it	has	 tremendous
beauty.
Love	makes	 everybody	 a	 great	 poet,	 and	 if	 love	 cannot	make	you	 a	 poet	 then
nothing	can	make	you	a	poet.	Love	opens	a	totally	different	dimension	in	your
being.	Without	love	you	remain	confined	to	the	world	of	logic.	Once	love	starts
happening	 in	 your	 life,	 logic	 starts	 disappearing;	 a	 transcendence	 of	 logic
happens.
That's	why	the	logical	mind	will	always	call	love	a	madness,	a	blindness.	Logic
has	always	condemned	love	as	blind,	mad.	It	has	called	it	all	kinds	of	names	for
the	simple	reason	that	intellect	is	incapable	of	conceiving	it.
It	 is	 a	 totally	 different	world.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 arithmetic,	with	 logic,
with	 science.	 It	 is	 immeasurable,	 uncharted.	 Nobody	 knows	 exactly,	 precisely
what	 it	 is.	 Even	 those	 who	 have	 gone	 deepest	 into	 it	 have	 found	 themselves
almost	dumb	--	it	is	inexpressible.
But	the	experience	is	so	great,	so	ecstatic	that	it	explodes	in	many	ways.	It	may
explode	 in	 dancing,	 in	music,	 in	 poetry,	 in	 painting,	 in	 any	 kind	 of	 creativity.
Love	 is	 always	creative.	And	 the	world	has	been	 so	destructive	 for	 the	 simple
reason	 that	we	have	 taught	people	 to	 repress	 their	 love	energy.	Love	 repressed
becomes	destructive;	love	expressed	becomes	creativity.
My	 sannyas	believes	 in	 creativity,	 in	 love,	 in	 that	 almost	 transcendental	world
where	 mind	 is	 of	 no	 use	 and	 no	 help,	 where	 only	 heart	 can	 enter.	 So	 my
sannyasin	shave	to	move	from	the	head	to	the	heart	--	that	is	true	initiation.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#24
Chapter	title:	None
24	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007245
ShortTitle:	GWIND24
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Moses	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful	 names;	 it	 has	 three	 meanings	 and	 all	 are
significant.
The	first	is	the	saved	one,	because	Moses	was	saved	from	water.	And	the	second
meaning	is	delivered	by	god.
Unless	 god	 saves	 you	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to	 ba	 saved.	 Man	 is	 helpless,	 and	 to
understand	 it	 is	of	great	 significance.	The	deliverance	 is	 through	grace,	not	by
our	effort.	What	can	we	do?	Our	efforts	are	bound	to	be	very	tiny	and	our	efforts
will	come	out	of	our	ignorance,	out	of	our	confusion.	They	are	bound	to	create
more	confusion,	 they	cannot	lead	us	beyond	confusion.	Hence	it	 is	 through	the
grace	of	god	that	one	is	saved.
All	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is	to	be	in	a	let-go,	to	allow	him	to	save	us.	That	is
the	trouble:	very	few	people	allow	god	to	save	them.	They	resist,	they	struggle,
they	fight.	You	have	been	struggling	with	me	for	so	long!
I	was	dying	 to	 see	your	 face	here!	And	you	were	hiding	 and	hiding.	But	now
there	is	no	way	--	I	am	going	to	save	you!
And	the	third	meaning	is	servant	of	god.	Once	you	are	saved	you	have	to	serve!
There	are	millions	of	Christians	--	they	are	only	so-called	Christians.	They	go	to
church	but	 that	 is	only	a	Sunday	affair.	It	 is	a	kind	of	sociality.	It	 is	good,	 it	 is
helpful	 in	many	ways,	because	 it	 is	 the	most	ancient	kind	of	 rotary	club	 --	 the
church	--	where	all	good	people	meet	and	praise	each	other	and	say	nice	things
to	each	other	and	everybody	feels	good.	But	they	are	not	Christians.
To	be	a	Christian,	 really	a	Christian,	one	needs	 to	be	a	Christ	 --	 less	 than	 that
won't	 do.	 Hence	 Nietzsche	 was	 right	 when	 he	 said	 that	 the	 first	 and	 the	 last
Christian	 died	 on	 the	 cross	 two	 thousand	 years	 ago.	His	 emphasis	was	 on	 the
first	 and	 the	 last.	 Of	 course	 he	 himself	 was	 a	 madman,	 but	 sometimes	 mad
people	 have	 great	 insights	which	 the	 so-called	 sane	 people	 go	 on	missing.	He
had	 tremendous	 intuitive	 energy.	 In	 fact	 he	 had	 too	much	 of	 it	 and	 could	 not
manage	it,	could	not	control	it,	could	not	be	a	master	of	it.
Had	he	been	a	meditator	he	would	have	become	a	Christ.	He	had	all	the	potential
but	he	remained	a	thinker.	And	that	is	the	calamity	that	has	happened	in	the	West
--	 and	 it	 has	 persisted	 for	 thousands	 of	 years	 now	 --	 that	 all	 brilliant	 people
become	confined	to	the	world	of	thought.
Friedrich	 Nietzsche	 or	 Ludwig	Wittgenstein	 or	 Bertrand	 Russell	 or	 Jean-Paul
Sartre	--	these	people	have	the	potential	but	don't	know	what	to	do	with	it;	they
don't	know	how	to	transcend	the	mind.	And	only	through	transcendence	can	that
potential	be	used,	otherwise	it	is	going	to	drive	you	crazy.	That's	what	happened
to	Nietzsche.	 It	 is	 as	 if	you	give	a	one-hundred-watt	bulb	a	one-thousand-watt
voltage;	it	is	bound	to	go	crazy.
The	 energy	 that	 could	 have	 become	 a	 breakthrough	 became	 a	 breakdown.
Nietzsche	needed	a	master,	he	needed	a	Buddha,	he	needed	a	Christ.	And	he	felt
the	need.	For	his	whole	 life	he	was	continuously	 thinking	of	Christ.	 In	 fact	he
was	haunted	by	 the	 idea	of	Christ,	 so	much	 so	 that	 he	became	 antagonistic	 to
Christ.	 It	became	almost	a	 torture.	To	avoid	it	he	became	anti-Christ.	When	he
became	 mad	 he	 even	 started	 signing	 his	 name	 "Anti-Christ,	 Friedrich
Nietzsche."	 First	 he	would	write	 "anti-Christ"	 and	 then	 "Friedrich	Nietzsche".
"Friedrich	Nietzsche"	became	secondary;	his	antagonism	to	Christ	became	more
essential	to	his	being.	That	was	just	resistance.	He	felt	a	great	pull	 towards	the
man	but	he	had	also	a	great	ego.
So	whenever	 there	were	 some	moments	when	 he	was	 not	 functioning	 like	 an
ego,	some	moment	of	 rest	and	 relaxation.	One	cannot	be	an	egoist	 for	 twenty-
four	hours	a	day;	it	is	too	hard	a	work	--	sometimes	one	has	to	relax.	Those	are
the	moments	when	the	windows	open.	And	in	those	moments	he	had	tremendous
insights.
This	is	one	of	his	great	insights,	that	the	first	and	last	Christian	died	on	the	cross
two	 thousand	 years	 before.	 He	 is	 saying	 all	 these	 Christians	 are	 bogus,	 false.
They	are	simply	paying	lip-service,	their	heart	is	not	with	Christ.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	 be	 a	 sannyasin	means	 to	 become	 totally	 involved	with	 the	 phenomenon	 of
being	a	Christ	or	a	Buddha
--	which	are	the	same	thing.	To	put	it	exactly,	it	simply	means	becoming	aware,
alert;	hence	Jesus	continuously	 says	 to	his	disciples,	 "Beware!"	Beware	means
be	aware.
Those	 two	words	 contain	his	whole	 teaching	 and	 those	 two	words	 contain	 the
teaching	of	all	the	buddhas.	Be	blissful	and	be	aware.	They	come	together:	if	you
are	blissful	you	will	be	aware;	 if	you	are	aware	you	will	be	blissful	--	 they	are
two	sides	of	the	same	coin.
Man	is	mind,	and	mind	can	never	be	peaceful.	In	all	the	languages	we	have	such
expressions	and	phrases	as	peace	of	mind,	mental	peace,	peaceful	mind	--	 they
are	all	wrong.
Joshua	Liebman	has	written	a	famous	book,	but	the	title	is	wrong,	and	from	that
very	point	he	starts	going	wrong.	PEACE	OF	MIND	is	 the	 title	of	 the	book	--
and	he	never	thinks	twice	about	it,	about	what	he	is	saying.	But	that	is	what	the
western	approach	 is.	The	West	has	 always	 thought	 that	you	can	achieve	peace
through	the	mind.	That's	where	East	differs	totally.
Through	the	mind	there	is	no	possibility	of	peace.	You	have	to	transcend	mind,
you	have	to	go	beyond	mind.	If	you	live	in	the	mind	you	will	live	in	noise.	It	can
be	lessened	but	 the	difference	will	only	be	of	degree	 .	So	there	are	more	noisy
minds	and	less	noisy	minds,	but	they	are	both	noisy.
Mind	cannot	be	without	noise	--	 that	 is	 impossible.	Mind	means	thoughts.	You
can	arrange	them	in	a	beautiful	way	but	they	are	still	there,	and	they	will	make	a
noise	--	howsoever	skilfully	arranged.	Mind	cannot	have	peace.
Peace	is	divine,	it	is	not	human.	Peace	means	absence	of	all	mental	processes:	no
thought,	 no	 desire,	 no	 imagination,	 no	 memory	 --	 as	 if	 the	 whole	 mind	 has
ceased	 completely.	And	 then	 suddenly	 you	 know	who	 you	 are	 and	 you	 know
what	this	existence	is	all	about.
It	is	not	that	the	mind	is	not	useful,	it	can	be	used,	but	it	can	be	used	only	be	a
master.	And	the	master	is	one	who	knows	how	to	transcend	it.
Once	 you	know	 the	 ladder	 that	 goes	 beyond	 the	mind	you	 are	 a	master.	Then
whenever	you	want	to	use	it	you	can	use	it	and	whenever	you	don't	want	to	use	it
you	can	simply	put	it	aside.	Right	now	you	may	go	on	saying	"Please	stop"	It	is
not	going	to	listen	to	you.	In	fact	the	more	you	try	to	stop	it,	the	more	the	mind
will	go	berserk.	It	will	show	its	power	to	you,	saying	'Who	are	you?'	The	servant
has	become	the	master	--
and	whenever	a	servant	becomes	a	master,	he	is	a	very	bad	master.
Meditation	 simply	 means	 putting	 things	 in	 their	 right	 places.	 Mind	 is	 a
mechanism;	you	are	not	the	mind.	You	are	consciousness,	and	you	can	become
conscious	of	the	mind.	Mind	becomes	just	an	object	of	your	consciousness.	You
are	a	mirror.	You	can	mirror	and	reflect	everything	in	the	mind,	outside	the	mind.
They	are	all	objects	in	front	of	you;	you	are	pure	subjectivity.	This	is	the	whole
definition	of	 sannyas,	 that	 you	 are	 consciousness.	And	 this	 is	 the	whole	 effort
here,	to	help	you	to	go	beyond	mind.	And	it	is	not	difficult.
The	 most	 difficult	 thing	 is	 to	 live	 in	 the	 mind	 and	 to	 make	 an	 effort	 to	 be
peaceful.	That	will	be	 just	 superficial	peace;	 a	very	 thin	 layer	of	peace	can	be
spread,	but	deep	down	there	will	be	a	volcano	and	it	can	erupt	any	moment.	A
slight	provocation	is	enough	and	all	peace	is	lost.
But	 if	you	know	how	to	go	beyond	it,	 then	there	 is	no	problem	at	all:	you	can
come	 into	 the	mind,	 you	 can	 go	 out	 of	 the	mind.	 Peace	 is	 never	 of	 the	mind,
peace	is	a	state	of	no-mind,	hence	I	call	it	divine,	not	human.	A	peaceful	man	is	a
messenger	of	god.	He	is	no	more	himself,	he	exists	only	on	behalf	of	god.
Meditation	 is	 our	 true	 home.	 Without	 it	 we	 are	 homeless.	 A	 man	 without
meditation	is	without	shelter.
He	 exists	 just	 like	 driftwood,	 he	 is	 accidental.	 He	 goes	 on	 moving	 from	 one
event	 to	 another	 event,	 because	 one	 has	 to	 keep	 oneself	 somehow	 occupied.
otherwise	life	is	boring,	meaningless	and	one	becomes	scared.
So	one	goes	on	moving	and	goes	on	doing	thing,	which	are	not	really	essential	at
all,	but	one	has	to	do	them	otherwise	one	can	see	the	emptiness	inside,	and	that
is	very	scary.	Without	meditation	you	are	bound	to	remain	empty.	You	can	go	on
stuffing	 yourself	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupidities;	 they	 will	 never	 make	 you	 feel
fulfilled.
Meditation	 is	 the	only	way	 to	become	fulfilled,	 to	know	 the	 innermost	core	of
your	being	which	is	already	perfect,	which	needs	no	perfection,	which	is	already
overflowing	with	joy	and	peace	and	love.
Meditation	simply	makes	you	aware	of	that	which	is	already	inside	you.	It	 is	a
way	 of	 awakening	 to	 one's	 own	 self.	And	 the	moment	 you	 know	 it	 you	 have
found	 the	 home;	 then	 you	 are	 no	 more	 homeless.	 Then	 you	 are	 rooted	 in
existence;	then	you	know	that	you	are	not	just	a	driftwood,	then	you	know	that
you	are	not	accidental.	Then	you	know	that	you	are	part	of	a	divine	existence,	of
an	organic	unity	of	the	whole.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
To	experience	it	is	to	become	holy,	to	know	the	whole	is	to	become	holy.	And	to
know	oneself	as	part	of	the	whole,	an	intrinsic	part	of	the	whole,	brings	great	joy
because	the	most	significant	thing	in	man's	life	is	to	know	that	he	is	needed	by
existence,	that	he	is	not	useless.
Jean-Paul	Sartre	says	 'Man	is	a	useless	passion.'	That	simply	shows	he	has	not
known	meditation	at	all.
Without	meditation	man	certainly	is	a	useless	passion	but	with	meditation	man	is
neither	 useless	 nor	 a	 passion.	 Man	 is	 tremendously	 significant	 an	 d	 is
compassion,	 not	 passion	 at	 all.	 Passion	 rises	 to	 new	 heights	 and	 becomes
compassion,	it	becomes	love.
[A	young	Italian	man	has	opted	to	keep	his	original	name,	Ganesh,	as	part	of	his
sannyas	name.	Osho	prefixes	it	with	'anand',	then	goes	on	to	explain	that	Ganesh
is	the	name	of	a	mythological	Hindu	god.]
Ganesh	is	not	a	historical	person,	but	it	is	far	more	significant	than	any	historical
person	can	 ever	be.	 It	 is	 a	metaphor,	 it	 is	 very	poetic.	 It	 has	 to	be	decoded,	 it
carries	a	great	message.
Ganesh	is	half	man	and	half	animal.	This	is	the	first	thing	to	be	understood,	that
no	man	is	born	as	a	fully	grown-up	man;	every	man	is	born	half	animal	and	half
man.	Hence	 the	 constant	duality,	 the	 conflict	 in	man:	 a	pull	 towards	 animality
and	also	a	pull	towards	god,	divinity.	And	man	is	torn	apart;	he	lives	in	anguish.
That	is	his	anguish,	his	anxiety:	What	to	do,	where	to	go?
His	lower	being	is	always	gravitating	towards	the	past	--	that	is	the	animal	--	and
his	potential	is	always	hankering	for	a	chance	to	grow	--	that	is	man's	future,	his
hope.	Ganesh	represents	both;	he	is	half	man,	half	elephant.
This	situation	has	to	be	changed.	And	one	cannot	go	back,	one	cannot	become	an
animal	 again,	 because	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 going	 back.	 Whatsoever	 you
have	known	you	cannot	forget	and	whatsoever	you	have	experienced	is	part	of
you;	you	cannot	undo	whatsoever	you	have	done.	Hence	there	is	no	going	back,
you	cannot	move	backwards	in	time,	you	can	only	go	forwards.	But	the	pull	of
the	past	is	great	because	the	past	is	great;	the	future	is	only	a	possibility	and	the
past	has	happened.
Hence	 if	 you	 look	 at	 Ganesh	 the	 animal	 is	 very	 heavy.	 It	 is	 the	 head	 part	 --
Ganesh	has	the	head	of	an	elephant.	It	is	the	head,	the	mind	that	is	full	of	the	past
and	 very	 heavy,	 naturally.	 Just	 think	 of	 a	man	with	 an	 elephant's	 head.	 It	 is	 a
miracle	how	he	manages	 to	sit	 --	he	will	 fall	down,	he	cannot	carry	 that	much
load.	He	should	be	standing	on	his	head!
There	 is	 another	 beautiful	metaphor.	 If	 you	 look	 at	 the	 statue	 of	Ganesh	 he	 is
riding	on	a	rat'	Now	the	head	is	of	an	elephant;	the	man	is	top-heavy,	carrying	a
mountain,	and	riding	on	a	rat.	The	rat	represents	logic	because	logic	is	nothing
but	 continuous	 hair-splitting,	 chopping.	 That's	 what	 the	 rat	 goes	 on	 doing,
continuously	cutting	things.	Whatsoever	comes	in	front	of	the	rat	it	starts	cutting
it.	And	that's	what	logic	is.
In	Indian	mythology	the	rat	represents	 logic.	The	head	rides	on	logic,	 the	head
lives	on	logic,	it	goes	on	becoming	bigger	and	bigger.	The	more	logical	you	are,
the	more	 powerful	 and	 heavy	 and	 destructive	 your	 head	 becomes.	One	 has	 to
drop	the	head,	one	has	to	drop	logic;	one	has	to	learn	ways	which	can	make	one
headless.
The	whole	methodology	of	sannyas	is	to	help	you	cut	your	head.	With	the	head
gone	the	whole	past	disappears.	You	become	light,	you	become	very	weightless.
You	can	fly,	your	heart	has	wings.	Your	head	is	just	like	a	rock,	it	cannot	fly	--
and	to	reach	god	you	need	wings.	And	you	don't	need	logic,	you	need	love.
Love	is	creative,	logic	is	destructive.	Logic	means	doubt,	love	means	trust.
So	 try	 to	 understand	 this.	 I	 don't	 know	who	 has	 given	 you	 the	 name...	 Some
Hindu	fool?	--	Nimkoroli	Baba.	--	Some	Hindu	fool,	certainly.	But	you	wanted
to	 keep	 it	 so	 I	 will	 try	 to	 dismantle	 you,	 because	 your	 head	 will	 have	 to	 be
chopped	off!
Carrying	 an	 elephant's	 head	 is	 dangerous.	 And	 the	 poor	 rat	 --	 he	 has	 to	 be
relieved,	released.	I	have	kept	your	name	just	so	that	I	can	go	on	remembering
what	has	to	be	done	with	you!
Marion	is	a	very	beautiful	but	strange	name.	It	is	a	paradoxical	name.
It	has	two	meanings.	The	first	meaning	is	bitter	grace	and	the	second	meaning	is
living	fragrance.	On	the	surface	one	cannot	see	how	they	are	related.	How	can
they	 be	 related?	 Bitter	 grace	 and	 living	 fragrance	 seem	 to	 be	 totally	 different
words.	But	they	are	related	very	deep	down.
Grace	is	bitter	because	you	have	to	drop	your	identity.	That's	why	it	is	bitter.	You
have	 to	 drop	 your	 ego,	 you	 have	 to	 drop	 your	 personality.	 You	 have	 to	 go
through	a	kind	of	death,	only	then	does	your	real	life	begin.	Unless	you	die,	god
is	not;	when	you	die,	god	is.	Hence	it	is	a	bitter	medicine.
Buddha	 used	 to	 say	 that	 the	 journey	 to	 truth	 begins	 in	 bitterness	 and	 ends	 in
sweetness.	That's	why	many	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
people	never	start	the	journey	--	because	it	is	so	bitter	they	become	scared.	And
their	logical	mind	says	 'If	it	is	so	bitter	even	in	the	beginning,	how	much	more
bitter	it	will	be	when	you	have	reached	the	goal?	If	the	first	step	is	so	bitter	just
think	of	the	last	step.	And	then	it	will	be	very	difficult	even	to	come	back;	you
may	have	gone	too	far.	Better,	don't	take	the	first	step.'
So	the	mind	does	not	allow	people	to	take	the	first	step	because	it	is	bitter.	But
the	 ultimate	 flowering	 is	 a	 great	 sweetness,	 it	 is	 living	 fragrance.	The	 journey
begins	in	death	and	ends	in	abundant	life.
Jesus	said	to	Nicodemus	 'Unless	you	are	reborn,	unless	you	die	as	you	are	and
are	 born	 again,	 you	 cannot	 enter	 into	my	 kingdom	 of	 god.'	 Nicodemus	 never
returned	to	him.	He	was	a	professor	 in	 the	university	and	he	came	in	 the	night
when	nobody	was	 there.	He	could	not	 even	gather	 the	 courage	 to	 come	 in	 the
day.	He	was	a	rabbi	too,	a	well-known	scholar	--	what	would	people	think	of	him
going	to	this	madman,	Jesus?
So	in	the	night	when	nobody	was	there	he	came,	hidden.	The	first	statement	of
Jesus	was	enough	to	stop	him;	he	was	not	ready	to	pay	that	much	of	a	price.	And
Jesus	made	it	clear	from	the	very	beginning,	'Unless	you	are	ready	to	die,	forget
all	about	 it;	you	cannot	enter	 into	my	kingdom	of	god,	you	cannot	be	a	 fellow
pilgrim	of	mine	--	it	is	impossible.	The	ego	will	have	to	be	dropped.'
Drop	 the	 ego,	 howsoever	 bitter	 it	 is,	 howsoever	 painful	 it	 is,	 and	 you	will	 be
tremendously	rewarded.
Meditation	 sharpens	 your	 brilliance.	Ordinarily	 your	 sword	 is	 rusty.	You	 have
never	cared	about	it,	you	have	not	even	taken	it	out	of	its	sheath.	And	it	needs
constant	sharpening,	otherwise	it	is	not	even	useful	in	cutting	vegetables'	And	it
has	great	work	to	do	--	it	has	to	kill	you!	That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	cutting
your	head-off	with	your	own	hands.	It	is	real	suicide.	It	is	not	of	the	body,	it	is
the	suicide	of	the	ego	--	and	the	ego	is	very	subtle	and	very	cunning.	Unless	you
are	sharp	enough	it	will	go	deceiving	you.	You	throw	it	out	from	one	door	and	it
will	enter	from	another.	And	it	is	so	cunning	that	it	can	even	come	in	the	name	of
humbleness.
You	can	watch	the	so-called	humble	people	and	you	can	see	their	egos.	They	are
egoistic	about	their	humbleness,	they	are	egoistic	about	their	simplicity,	egoistic
about	their	saintliness,	even	egoistic	about	their	egolessness.
A	 man	 without	 ego	 is	 neither	 egoistic	 nor	 egoless.	 Both	 are	 dropped.	 He	 is
simply	there.	To	create	that	state	is	very	great	intelligence	is	needed.	Mind	is	not
enough,	only	meditation	can	help.
So	concentrate	on	meditation.	Make	it	a	point	that	this	is	the	topmost	priority	in
your	 life,	 everything	 else	 is	 secondary.	 I	 don't	 say	 anything	 else	 to	 my
sannyasins,	all	 that	 I	want	 them	to	do	 is	 to	become	meditators,	and	everything
else	 follows	 of	 its	 own	 accord.	 Freedom	 comes,	 bliss	 comes,	 peace	 comes,
celebration	 comes,	 virtue	 comes,	 transformation	 comes,	 and	 ultimately	 the
experience	of	god.
Become	an	image	of	meditation,	become	meditation.	Walk	in	meditation,	sit	 in
meditation,	eat	in	meditation,	sleep	in	meditation.	Let	the	flavour	of	meditation
spread	all	over	your	life	--	breathe	in,	breathe	out,	but	meditation	continues.
Meditation	 simply	means	an	awareness	of	 all	 that	 is	happening.	That	which	 is
happening	outside	--	that	is	the	outermost	circle	of	your	life.	Then	that	which	is
being	done	by	your	body	 --	 that	 is	 the	 second	concentric	 circle,	 closer	 to	you.
Then	the	third	concentric	circle	is	that	which	is	done	by	your	mind.	And	then	the
fourth	 is	 that	which	 is	 done	 by	 your	 feelings	 and	 emotions.	And	within	 these
four	concentric	circles	is	your	centre,	the	fifth.
If	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 all	 that	 is	 going	 on,	 sooner	 or	 later	 you	will	 become
centred	at	the	centre	and	you	will	be	able	to	see	the	whole	panorama,	the	whole
drama	 of	 the	 outer	 world,	 of	 physical	 activity,	 of	 psychological	 activity,	 of
emotional	activity.	And	when	you	are	able	to	see	all	 this	you	become	free	of	it
because	 immediately	you	come	 to	know	 that	you	are	 the	 seer,	 you	are	not	 the
doer.	That	is	the	greatest	revolution	in	life,	when	this	shift	happens,	that	you	are
no	 more	 a	 doer	 but	 just	 a	 seer,	 a	 witness.	 Than	 one	 becomes	 an	 image	 of
meditation	--	a	Buddha,	a	Christ,	a	Zarathustra.
Meditation	 releases	 great	 creativity.	 It	 is	 an	 explosion;	 all	 your	 seeds	 start
sprouting.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 see	 how	 much	 potential	 you	 were	 carrying
within	yourself:	a	great	garden	with	so	many	flowers,	such	beautiful	bushes	and
trees	and	 so	many	birds	 singing...	 a	whole	paradise!	But	we	are	not	ordinarily
aware	of	it.	We	are	completely	closed,	we	have	not	opened	up;	we	are	living	like
a	capsule	which	has	no	opening,	no	windows.
Leibniz	has	the	right	word	for	it.	He	calls	man	a	monad,	a	windowless	house;	no
doors,	no	windows.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Meditation	throws	open	all	the	doors	and	all	the	windows.	Suddenly	you	become
aware	 of	 the	 vast	 sky,	 the	 stars,	 the	 moon,	 the	 sun,	 the	 wind,	 the	 rain,	 the
rainbows,	the	clouds	--	the	whole	infinity	of	it,	the	whole	spectrum	of	it.	And	the
moment	you	become	aware	of	it	your	heart	starts	singing	and	dancing.
That's	what	I	mean	by	a	poet.	I	don't	literally	mean	a	poet;	not	that	one	starts	just
composing	poetry,	but	that	one's	whole	life	becomes	poetic.	To	whatsoever	one
does	there	is	the	golden	touch	of	creativity.	You	touch	dust	and	by	your	touch	it
is	 transformed	 into	 gold.	 Wherever	 you	 move	 it	 becomes	 a	 sacred	 place;
wherever	you	sit	 it	becomes	a	temple,	a	shrine	of	infinite	beauty	and	grandeur.
Whatsoever	you	do	releases	the	imprisoned	splendour	within	you.	And	this	goes
on	happening;	it	is	not	something	that	happens	once.
Meditation	 starts	 an	 explosion	 which	 is	 infinite,	 which	 goes	 on	 and	 on,
unending;	there	is	no	end	to	it.
There	is	a	beginning	in	meditation	but	no	end.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#25
Chapter	title:	None
25	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007255
ShortTitle:	GWIND25
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
Arunachalam	 is	 a	 sacred	mountain.	 In	 the	 South	 no	 other	 place	 has	 so	much
sanctity.	For	centuries	many	people	have	become	enlightened	on	Arunachalam,
and	one	of	the	last	and	greatest	was	Maharishi	Raman.
Wherever	 an	 enlightened	person	 lives,	 the	 very	 space,	 the	 very	 earth	 becomes
suffused	with	something	of	the	known,	of	the	mysterious.	It	carries	the	vibe	for
thousands	of	years.
Bliss	is	also	a	peak,	a	great	peak	of	consciousness,	it	is	a	mountain.	And	it	is	an
uphill	task.	We	have	made	many	sacred	places	on	the	mountains	for	the	simple
reason	that	people	can	know	that	bliss	is	a	mountainous	journey,	it	is	a	climbing
towards	the	heights.	And	it	needs	tremendous	courage,	the	courage	to	risk.
Going	 downhill	 needs	 no	 courage,	 no	 intelligence.	 Going	 uphill	 needs	 both
courage	 and	 intelligence,	 and	 a	 constant	 effort.	 There	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than
bliss;	bliss	represents	the	ultimate	experience	of	god.
Sannyas	is	the	uphill	journey.
Make	every	effort,	put	your	total	energy	into	it,	only	then	is	the	miracle	possible.
It	 certainly	 happens	 and	 every	 human	 being	 is	 capable	 of	 achieving	 it,	 but	 it
needs	constant	effort.	It	needs	not	a	wavering	mind
--	unwavering.	With	great	trust,	with	great	hope	one	goes	on	dropping	the	known
territory	 for	 the	 unknown,	 dropping	 the	 familiar	 for	 the	 un-familiar	 --	 because
god	is	the	most	unknown	phenomenon.
Even	 those	 who	 have	 known	 him	 cannot	 claim	 that	 they	 have	 known	 him,
because	in	knowing	him	the	claimer	disappears;	one	becomes	utterly	silent.
Those	 who	 say	 they	 have	 achieved	 are	 either	 deluding	 themselves	 or	 others.
Those	 who	 have	 achieved	 can	 at	 the	 most	 smile	 --	 because	 it	 is	 not	 an
achievement	in	the	ordinary	sense,	it	is	a	realisation.	It	is	not	something	added	to
you,	it	is	something	that	blooms,	blossoms	within	you.	In	a	sense	it	was	already
there;	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
in	a	sense	now	you	have	come	to	know	it	so	now	you	have	realised	it.
Life	is	dull	without	love;	it	becomes	bright	with	love.	Life	is	dark	without	love;
with	 love	 it	 becomes	 full	 of	 light.	 Love	 is	 the	 name	 of	 your	 inner	 light.	 That
flame	is	already	there	but	surrounded	by	much	smoke.	And	the	smoke	consists
of	memories,	imagination,	thoughts,	desire.	The	whole	mind	creates	a	long	list,	a
thick	wall	around	the	flame,	a	thick	wall	of	smoke.
The	only	way	to	reach	your	of	flame	is	to	disperse	this	smoke.	And	that's	what
sannyas	is	all	about:	getting	rid	of	the	smoke,	getting	rid	of	thoughts	and	desires
and	 becoming	 so	 silent	 and	 desireless,	 as	 if	 there	 is	 nothing	 to	 be	 achieved,
nowhere	to	go.	In	that	relaxed	state	the	smoke	starts	dispersing	of	its	own	accord
because	 we	 are	 no	 co-operating	 with	 it.	 It	 is	 through	 our	 co-operation	 that	 it
lives,	gets	food	and	nourishment,	is	nurtured.
Once	 there	 is	 a	disconnection,	once	you	are	no	more	 feeding	 it,	 it	 is	bound	 to
disperse.	And	as	it	starts	dispersing,	clarity	arises,	brightness	arises,	intelligence
arises,	and	life	becomes	full	of	meaning	and	significance.
Life	is	life	only	when	love	is	burning	bright	inside	you,	when	the	flame	of	love
is	so	bright	that	it	starts	radiating	around	you,	that	it	starts	reaching	others,	that
people	 can	 feel	 it,	 that	 your	 love	 becomes	 almost	 so	 tangible	 that	 people	 can
touch	it.	Then	it	is	not	only	a	blessing	to	you,	it	is	a	blessing	to	everybody	else
too.
A	 real	man	 is	 always	 an	 enrichment	 to	 the	world,	 to	 existence;	 he	 contributes
much.	And	 unless	 you	 contribute	 something	 you	will	 never	 feel	 blissful.	 It	 is
through	contributing	something	to	existence	that	you	participate	in	the	work	of
the	creator,	because	you	yourself	become	a	creator.	To	be	a	creator	is	to	be	part
of	god	--	there	is	no	other	way.
Avalokita	 is	 one	 of	 the	 names	 of	 Gautam	 the	 Buddha.	We	 have	 given	 many
names	to	Buddha;	each	name	shows	one	aspect	of	his	multi-dimensional	being.
No	single	express	his	reality.	Avalokita	is	one	of	his	aspects.	Literally	it	means
one	who	is	capable	of	seeing,	observing,	of	detached	observation,	being	neither
for	 nor	 against,	with	 no	 liking,	 no	 disliking	 --	 a	 choiceless	 awareness,	 simply
seeing	 whatsoever	 is	 the	 case	 without	 imposing	 any	 idea,	 any	 interpretation,
allowing	the	mind	to	come	and	start	spinning	and	manufacturing	thoughts	about
it.
Once	 you	 say	 'This	 is	 good,'	 the	mind	 has	 come	 in;	 you	 say	 'This	 is	 bad,'	 the
mind	has	come	in.	If	you	don't	say	anything,	if	you	don't	make	any	statement	but
you	simply	go	on	seeing...	If	you	see	a	rose	flower	and	you	say	'It	is	beautiful,'
the	mind	has	come	 in;	now	you	are	no	more	a	pure	 seer,	you	are	distracted	 in
fact.	The	moment	the	mind	says	'It	is	beautiful,'	you	have	started	thinking	about
beauty,	 you	 have	 lost	 track	 of	 the	 reality	 of	 the	 rose.	 A	word,	 'beautiful',	 has
come	in;	now	the	word	'beautiful'	will	have	its	own	associations.
You	will	remember	the	man	you	love,	the	woman	you	love,	you	will	remember
the	dog	that	you	loved	when	you	were	a	child.	Now	the	mind	can	go	on	and	on;
you	have	forgotten	about	the	rose	flower.	And	the	moment	you	say	it	is	beautiful
you	 have	 remembered	 other	 rose	 flowers,	 Now	 this	 rose	 flower	 is	 far	 away;
between	 this	 rose	 flower	 and	you	 there	 is	 a	 long	queue	of	 roses	which	 are	 no
more.	And	they	will	contaminate	your	seeing,	they	will	not	allow	you	to	see	this
rose	flower	which	is	unique,	which	is	incomparable	because	no	other	rose	flower
has	ever	been	like	this	and	will	never	be	like	this	again.	This	moment	is	unique
but	the	mind	is	always	a	distracting	factor.
Being	choiceless	means	not	allowing	the	mind	to	say	anything,	putting	the	mind
aside,	just	looking	at	a	thing	without	any	barrier	of	words,	so	that	you	can	have	a
contact,	 a	 direct	 contact	 with	 reality.	 That's	 one	 of	 Buddha's	 fundamental
teachings,	 choiceless	 awareness;	 hence	 one	 of	 his	 names	 is	Avalokita.	And	he
says,	 and	 says	 truly,	 that	 if	 you	 can	become	 a	 detached	observer	 of	 existence,
your	life	will	be	full	of	bliss.
It	is	bound	to	be	so,	it	is	inevitable:	ais	dhammo	sanantano	--	he	says	this	is	the
ultimate	law	of	existence,	that	bliss	happens	only	to	those	whose	consciousness
is	 absolutely	 pure	 of	 thoughts,	whose	 consciousness	 is	 just	 like	 a	 pure	mirror,
crystal	 clear,	 with	 no	 idea,	 with	 no	 a	 priori	 conclusion.	 And	 then	 a	 miracle
happens:	you	start	seeing	everything	in	its	true	reality	--	and	that's	what	god	is.
If	you	can	see	a	rose	flower	in	its	true	reality	you	have	seen	one	of	the	faces	of
god.	If	you	can	look	into	the	eyes	of	a	child	without	any	word,	thought,	coming
in	between	you	and	those	innocent	eyes,	you	have	looked	into	the	eyes	of	god.
And	slowly	one	becomes	aware	that	the	whole	existence	is	full	of	god,	that	god
is	 not	 a	 person,	 that	 god	 is	 the	 reality	 of	 everything,	 the	 underlying	 reality	 of
everything.
He	 is	 in	 that	which	 you	 are	 observing	 and	 he	 is	 in	 you	who	 are	 the	 observer.
Knowing	it	the	observer	and	the	observed	become	one	--	and	that	is	the	ultimate
realisation	of	oneness.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Mind	divides,	 it	 creates	 a	 duality;	 the	 observer	 and	 the	 observed	become	 two.
When	 there	 is	 no	 mind	 they	 start	 coming	 closer,	 closer,	 closer,	 melting	 and
merging	into	each	other.	Then	it	 is	not	that	you	are	seeing	the	rose	flower,	you
are	 the	 rose	 flower.	 It	 is	 as	 if	 the	 rose	 flower	 is	 seeing	 itself.	 There	 is	 no
distinction,	 no	 separation.	 That	 is	 union	 with	 reality	 or	 it	 is	 better	 to	 call	 it
reunion,	because	once	we	were	in	that	union,	before	we	were	born.	But	we	have
lost	track	of	it.	That	is,	we	have	been	in	the	paradise,	we	have	lost	it	--	we	have
to	regain	it,	and	this	is	the	way.
So	 let	 your	 name	 remind	 you	 that	 this	 is	 going	 to	 be	 your	 path:	 awareness,
watchfulness,	observation,	choicelessness.
[Osho	gives	sannyas	to	an	Italian,	Fabio,	adding	the	prefix	anand,	which	means
bliss,	he	explains,	then	continues:]
Fabio	is	avery	dangerous	name.	Yes	--	it	means	a	bean-grower!	I	am	reminded	of
an	 Italian	 joke:	 Italians	 like	 to	 eat	 beans	 every	 Saturday	 evening	 to	 have	 a
bubble-bath	every	Sunday	morning!
You	get	the	idea	or	not?
So	please	stop	bean-growing!
We	will	make	your	name	a	little	different,	I	will	give	you	a	new	meaning;	there
is	just	a	little	difference:	being	grower.	Forget	the	Italian	meaning	completely!
Let	your	being	grow.	And	for	bubble-baths	there	are	other	things!
One	 has	 to	 work	 for	 bliss	 but	 still,	 ultimately,	 it	 is	 a	 gift	 of	 God.	 This	 looks
paradoxical;	it	is	not	logical.
Logic	will	say	either	you	have	to	work	for	it	--	then	you	are	the	achiever,	then	it
is	the	achievement	of	your	work.	Or	if	it	is	a	gift	of	God,	then	you	need	not	work
because	whenever	God	feels	like	giving	you	the	gift,	he	will.	But	life	does	not	go
according	to	logic.
Many	people	follow	the	logical	line.	For	centuries	they	have	done	that	and	they
have	missed.	The	person	who	thinks	it	can	be	achieved	through	effort	will	never
achieve	it.	Through	effort	he	will	become	more	and	more	egoistic.
There	are	religions	that	believe	that	 it	can	be	achieved	only	through	effort.	For
example,	 Jainism	 in	 India	believes	 that	 it	 can	be	achieved	only	 through	effort,
there	is	no	other	way	--	no	grace	of	God	because	there	is	no	God	and	no	grace.
You	have	 to	work	hard	and	you	have	 to	achieve	 it.	Naturally	 they	 say	 it	 takes
many	many	lives,	only	then	can	you	achieve	it.
In	 fact	 it	 is	 because	 of	 this	 idea	 that	 the	 idea	 of	 many	 lives	 arose	 in	 India,
because	one	life	does	not	seem	to	be	enough	to	achieve	bliss.	Half	of	life	is	lost
in	getting	educated,	getting	married,	getting	settled;	one	third	is	lost	in	sleep,	in
eating,	 in	 talking,	 in	 fighting,	 in	 playing	 cards	 and	 chess	 and	 looking	 at	 the
movies	and	a	thousand	and	one	things.
If	one	simply	calculates,	then	out	of	seventy	years,	which	is	the	normal	span	of
life,	you	will	not	have	even	seven	minutes	left	for	yourself.	And	seven	minutes
meditation	is	not	going	to	help;	hence	you	will	need	many	many	lives.	Indians
believe	 millions	 of	 lives,	 eighty-four	 million	 lives,	 then	 one	 becomes
enlightened.	The	very	idea	is	such	that	one	will	fall	flat	and	forget	all	about	it.
Such	a	long	time	--	who	is	going	to	wait?	This	is	one	of	the	logical	standpoints.
The	 other	 logical	 standpoint	 has	 also	 been	 followed.	 There	 have	 been	 many
religions	which	believe	that	you	have	simply	to	pray	to	God	because	everything
happens	according	to	his	will.	So	all	that	you	need	is	to	pray.	Go	on	begging	and
go	 on	 praising	 the	 Lord	 --	 as	 if	 he	 believes	 in	 bribery	 and	 praise	 and	 all	 that
nonsense,	 as	 if	 you	 can	 persuade	 him	 to	 give	 you	 the	 ultimate	 gift.	 Both	 are
wrong.	Both	will	miss	because	both	are	taking	only	half	of	reality.
My	attitude	is	that	one	needs	an	effortless	effort.	There	are	reasons	for	thinking
effort	 is	 needed	 and	 there	 are	 reasons,	 perfectly	 valid	 reasons,	 for	 concluding
that	 the	 ultimate	 thing	 always	 happens	 through	 the	 grace	 of	 God.	 It	 can	 be
understood	only	in	this	way,	that	efforts	are	needed	to	prepare	you	to	receive	the
gift.
Ordinarily	you	are	not	ready	even	to	receive	--	your	doors	are	closed,	your	heart
is	closed.	Even	 if	God	shouts	you	won't	 listen.	And	God	goes	on	knocking	on
your	doors,	but	you	never	open	the	doors;	in	fact	you	don't	think	that	there	are
any	doors.	You	go	on	living	your	ordinary,	mechanical,	unconscious	life.	Efforts
are	 needed	 to	make	 you	 conscious,	 but	 efforts	 can	 only	make	 you	 conscious,
they	cannot	give	you	bliss.
But	whenever	you	are	blissful	that	means	something	has	descended	from	above.
And	those	who	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
attained	 bliss	 have	 felt	 that	 "our	 efforts	 have	 cleaned	 our	 hearts,	 opened	 our
doors,	removed	all	the	barriers."
And	 then	 one	 day,	 suddenly,	 something	 starts	 pouring	 from	 the	 beyond,	 from
some	 unknown	 source.	 And	 when	 you	 look	 back	 then	 you	 can	 see	 that	 your
efforts	were	very	tiny.	You	cannot	say	this	tremendous	ecstasy	is	an	outcome	of
your	tiny	efforts,	but	still	 they	were	needed,	they	were	essentially	needed,	they
cannot	be	avoided.
So	one	has	to	meditate,	one	has	to	pray,	one	has	to	purify	one's	being.	One	has	to
bring	clarity	 to	one's	mind	and	 love	 to	one's	heart	 just	as	a	preparation	so	 that
one	is	capable	of	receiving	the	gift	when	God	is	ready	to	give.	And	in	fact,	God
is	always	ready	to	give,	it	is	just	that	we	are	not	ready	to	receive!
We	 are	 in	 search	 of	 a	 home.	 Everybody	 --	 consciously	 or	 unconsciously,
knowingly	or	unknowingly	--
we	 are	 all	 groping	 for	 a	 home.	 Somewhere	 deep	 within	 our	 being	 there	 is	 a
remembrance	that	we	had	a	home.	It	is	very	vague,	not	clear-cut;	but	you	have
not	 forgotten	 it	 completely,	 nobody	 ever	 forgets	 it	 completely.	 It	 goes	 on
surrounding	you	like	a	shadow,	like	a	nostalgia.	It	is	like	some	far	away	country,
sometime	when	you	were	happy,	blissful,	joyous,	when	there	was	no	anxiety,	no
anguish,	no	responsibility,	when	life	was	pure	bliss,	when	life	was	just	a	dance,	a
song.
Deep	down	somewhere	that	desire	still	lurks,	still	goes	on	goading	you	to	find	it
again.	All	religions	are	born	because	of	that	longing,	otherwise	there	is	no	reason
for	religions,	 they	don't	fulfil	any	practical	purpose.	That's	why	for	a	practical-
minded	 man	 religion	 seems	 to	 be	 absolutely	 absurd.	 Science	 seems	 to	 be
perfectly	okay	--	it	serves	many	practical	purposes.	What	is	the	practical	purpose
of	religion?	There	seems	to	be	no	utility,	it	is	a	sheer	wastage	of	time.	You	could
have	 produced	 something	 and	 you	 are	 meditating,	 just	 sitting	 silently,	 doing
nothing.
For	the	practical	man	it	seems	a	wastage.	But	even	if	the	practical	man	looks	just
a	 little	deeply	 inside	himself	he	will	 find	hidden	somewhere	 the	desire,	and	he
will	find	somewhere	the	feeling	'I	am	homeless.
This	 is	 not	 the	 place	 where	 I	 belong.	 This	 is	 not	 life;	 this	 cannot	 be	 all,
something	more	must	be	there.'
Of	course	we	don't	know	exactly	what	that	more	is,	but	a	persistent	feeling,	an
intuitive	force	goes	on	working	inside.	Sooner	or	later	one	has	to	listen	to	it,	and
the	 sooner	 one	 listens,	 the	 bettor,	 because	 one	 never	 knows	when	 life	will	 be
finished.	 Any	 moment	 it	 may	 be.	 If	 a	 man	 becomes	 really	 committed	 and
interested	in	religion	while	he	is	young,	then	there	is	a	possibility	that	he	finds
the	real	home.	Sannyas	is	a	very	scientific	process	to	find	it.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 bring	 a	 synthesis	 between	 the	 scientific	 approach	 and
religious	values.	On	the	surface	they	look	very	contrary,	but	only	on	the	surface.
Deep	 down	 there	 is	 something	 which	 makes	 them	 complementary,	 not
contradictory.	 Their	 fields	 are	 different.	 Science	 works	 in	 the	 objective	 world
and	religion	in	the	subjective,	but	the	approach	is	the	same.	Science	is	trying	to
know	 the	 truth	 about	 reality	 outside,	 and	 religion	 is	 trying	 to	 know	 the	 same
truth	about	 reality	 inside.	And	of	 course	 religion	 is	working	on	a	higher	plane
because	 the	 scientist	may	 know	many	 things	 about	 objects,	matter,	 electricity,
this	 and	 that,	 but	will	 be	 completely	 unaware	 of	 himself.	 The	 scientist	 knows
nothing	 about	 the	 scientist	 himself	 but	 he	 knows	 everything	 about	 everything
else.
This	situation	is	very	lopsided.	Science	will	become	perfect	only	when	it	accepts
religion	 as	 the	 ultimate	 goal.	And	 religion	 alone	 is	 not	 perfect	 either,	 because
you	cannot	just	live	on	the	inside;	you	need	bread	and	you	need	clothes	and	you
need	all	kinds	of	things	which	can	only	be	provided	by	science.
There	have	been	only	 two	kinds	of	people	up	 to	now:	 the	people	who	believe
that	science	is	enough	--
and	they	are	wrong,	they	have	created	the	whole	mess	in	the	West	--	and	there
have	been	people	in	the	East	who	believe	religion	is	enough;	they	have	created
the	 mess	 in	 the	 East.	 The	 East	 is	 starving	 because	 it	 has	 never	 worked	 for
scientific	growth,	and	the	West	is	going	insane	because	it	has	no	home.	Houses,
it	has	big	houses,	but	no	home.
My	effort	is	to	help	East	and	West	disappear	into	each	other,	to	create	a	meeting.
And	that	meeting	is	happening,	very	slowly,	without	any	deliberate	effort;	almost
spontaneously	it	is	happening	And	this	is	the	beauty	of	it,	that	my	sannyasins	are
very	deeply	neither	of	the	East	nor	of	the	West;	they	belong	to	the	whole	world
and	the	whole	world	belongs	to	them.	They	can	herald	a	new	man	on	earth.
Bliss	 is	music,	music	 that	 arises	when	 all	 your	 parts	 --	 your	 body,	 your	mind,
your	heart	and	your	being
--	are	functioning	in	deep	harmony;	then	your	life	becomes	an	orchestra!
Ordinarily	there	is	only	noise,	no	music.	The	body	goes	on	shouting	out	its	own
desires;	 they	 ask	 for	 their	 fulfilment,	 not	 taking	 any	 care	 of	 other	 needs.	 The
mind	goes	on	insisting	on	its	own	ambitions,	desires,	not	bothering	at	all	about
the	 heart,	 always	 ready	 to	 sacrifice	 everything	 for	 its	 own	 fulfilment.	 The
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
heart	goes	on	hankering	for	its	own	feelings,	emotions,	love.	And	the	being	is	an
absolutely	 neglected	 part;	 we	 have	 completely	 forgotten	 about	 it.	 It	 goes	 on
whispering	 in	 a	 still,	 small	 voice	 within	 you,	 but	 nobody	 listens	 because	 the
body	is	very	loud	and	the	mind	is	very	articulate,	and	the	heart	is	very	persistent.
Although	the	mind	goes	on	saying	that	the	heart	is	a	fool,	an	idiot,	mad	and	not
to	bother	about	it,	the	heart	does	not	take	any	note	of	the	mind;	it	goes	on	doing
its	things	in	spite	of	the	mind.	It	will	fall	in	love	and	it	will	do	a	thousand	and
one	things	about	which	the	mind	was	saying	'Don't	do	it.'	And	the	body	goes	on
in	its	own	way.
So	we	are	almost	a	crowd;	not	one	person,	not	a	unity,	not	an	organic	unity.	And
that's	what	is	missing.
His	 life	 can	 become	 a	 harmony.	 All	 these	 parts	 which	 are	 playing	 solo	 can
become	part	of	an	orchestra.
You	just	need	a	guide	which	can	bring	all	these	four	elements	together,	can	help
them	 understand	 each	 other,	 can	 help	 them	 to	 help	 each	 other.	 That's	 what
happens	through	meditation,	through	awareness.
Awareness	 becomes	 the	 guide	 and	 slowly	 slowly	 it	 persuades	 every	 different
section	of	your	being	to	come	into	closer	harmony.
So	put	all	your	energies	into	awareness.	Only	one	thing	I	teach	my	sannyasins:
be	meditative.	Out	 of	meditation	 there	 is	 great	music,	 and	 that	music	 is	 bliss.
Once	 you	 have	 heard	 your	 inner	 music	 everything	 else	 pales	 down.	 There	 is
nothing	which	can	be	compared	to	its	beauty	and	its	benediction.
A	man	 lives	 in	 defeat	 if	 he	 has	 not	 found	 bliss.	His	whole	 life	 is	 nothing	 but
frustration	and	failure,	writ	large.	And	you	can	see	it	on	peoples'	faces:	as	they
grow	 older,	 they	 grow	 sadder;	 as	 they	 grow	 older	 they	 start	 becoming	 very
angry,	angry	at	life,	because	it	has	shattered	all	their	dreams.	It	has	not	fulfilled
any	of	 their	desires.	And	 the	fault	 is	not	 life's,	 they	 themselves	are	 responsible
for	it.	They	were	trying	to	achieve	things	which	are	meaningless:	money,	power,
prestige.
If	you	don't	achieve	them	you	are	frustrated,	if	you	achieve	them	you	are	more
frustrated.	 In	 fact	 the	 non-achiever	 is	 in	 a	 better	 situation	 because	 he	 can	 still
hope.	At	 least	 the	hope	 is	 there	 that	one	day	you	will	achieve	 these	 things	and
then	everything	will	be	put	right.
The	achiever	is	really	in	an	absolute	gloom	because	now	there	is	no	hope.	He	has
staked	everything	on	these	stupid	things	and	now	they	are	there;	his	whole	life
has	gone	into	achieving	all	this	junk	and	now	it	is	there	--	and	he	is	as	unfulfilled
as	before.
By	 becoming	 a	 sannyasin	 one	 starts	 searching	 for	 bliss	 inside.	 You	 forget	 all
other	ambitions	which	lead	you	into	the	outside	world	because	bliss	is	something
inner,	absolutely	individual,	personal;	you	can	find	it	within	yourself	--	nobody
else	 is	 needed	 for	 it.	And	 once	 it	 is	 found	 you	 are	 victorious.	Then	 life	 has	 a
great	splendour	around	it.	Then	the	whole	sky	of	your	being	is	full	of	stars.
One	knows	that	one	has	not	lived	in	vain.	And	when	one	knows	that	one	has	not
lived	in	vain	then	even	death	is	beautiful.	Then	one	does	not	die	reluctantly,	one
dies	absolutely	blissfully.	Then	death	is	just	a	rest.
One	has	blossomed,	one	has	released	one's	fragrance;	now	the	time	has	come	to
rest,	to	disappear	in	the	whole.
A	sannyasin	 lives	beautifully	and	dies	beautifully.	His	 life	 is	 a	celebration	and
his	death	the	ultimate	in	celebration.
It	is	one	of	the	greatest	mysteries	of	life	that	we	are	born	with	perfect	bliss	in	our
being	and	we	remain	beggars	because	we	never	look	into	our	selves.	We	take	it
for	granted,	as	if	we	already	know	all	that	is	within.	That	is	a	great	idiotic	idea,
but	 it	prevails	all	over	 the	world.	We	are	 ready	 to	go	 to	 the	moon	 to	 seek	and
search	for	bliss,	but	we	are	not	ready	to	go	inside	ourselves	for	the	simple	reason
that	we	already	think	without	ever	going	in,	'What	is	there	inside?'
We	somehow	go	on	carrying	this	notion,	that	we	know	ourselves.	We	don't	know
ourselves	at	all.
Socrates	 is	 right	 when	 he	 says:	 Know	 thyself.	 In	 those	 two	 words	 the	 whole
wisdom	of	all	 the	sages	is	condensed,	because	in	knowing	thyself	all	 is	known
and	all	is	fulfilled	and	all	is	achieved.
We	 are	 not	 to	 become	 perfect,	we	 are	 born	 perfect.	And	we	 are	 not	 to	 invent
bliss,	we	have	only	to	discover	it.	Hence	it	is	not	such	a	difficult	matter	as	people
think;	it	is	a	very	simple	process	of	relaxing,	resting,	and	slowly	slowly	getting
centred.
The	 day	 you	 stumble	 upon	 your	 centre,	 suddenly	 there	 is	 all	 light;	 you	 have
found	the	switch.	It	is	just	like	groping	in	a	dark	room:	you	go	on	groping	and
then	you	 find	 the	 switch	and	 it	 is	 all	 light.	But	one	can	 sit	 in	darkness	 for	 the
whole	night,	crying	and	weeping	just	underneath	the	switch.	And	that's	actually
the	situation;	we	are	unnecessarily	crying	and	weeping.
Hence	 those	who	have	known	have	 a	 very	 strange	 feeling	 about	 people.	They
feel	great	compassion	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
also	great	laughter	because	they	can	see	the	stupidity	--	that	you	have	already	got
it	but	you	are	running	hither	and	thither	for	no	reason	at	all.	And	because	of	your
running	you	go	on	missing.	And	 they	have	great	compassion	also	because	you
are	suffering	--	that	is	true,	although	your	suffering	is	simply	foolish.	It	is	like	a
man	who	has	 seen	 a	 rope	 as	 a	 snake	 and	 now	 is	 running	 away	 and	 falls	 on	 a
banana	skin,	and	breaks	a	few	bones	and	may	be	hospital.	You	know	that	he	was
simply	a	fool	--	there	was	no	snake	at	all!	He	may	have	even	died	from	a	heart
attack...	And	without	any	snake;	just	a	rope	did	the	whole	trick.	This	is	the	rope
trick!
And	that	is	the	situation	of	man.
Initiation	means	 that	 you	have	 to	 change	 the	 situation.	This	 absurd,	 ridiculous
life	pattern	has	 to	be	changed	completely.	Look	within,	and	 if	you	cannot	 find
anything	 there,	 then	 look	outside.	But	 I	 say	categorically	 that	nobody	who	has
looked	within	has	ever	missed	it,	so	there	is	no	reason	for	your	to	miss	it.
Nobody	 is	an	exception,	 it	 is	an	absolute	 law:	one	who	goes	within,	 finds	 it	 --
finds	the	kingdom	of	god,	the	perfect	bliss,	the	absolute	truth.	And	with	it	comes
freedom	and	great	fragrance.	Life	becomes	a	dance,	a	poetry,	a	constant	ecstasy;
moment-to-moment	it	goes	on	growing.
One	 is	 bewildered	 at	 how	 much	 ecstasy	 is	 possible,	 and	 'Can	 I	 contain	 any
more?'	But	one	can	contain	infinite	ecstasy.	And	it	goes	on	becoming	more	and
more.	Unbelievable	 it	 is,	because	you	 think	 'Now	 this	 is	 the	 limit,	more	 is	not
possible,'	but	next	day	you	discover	that	there	is	still	more	possible,	and	you	go
on	discovering.	It	never	comes	to	an	end.	There	is	a	beginning	in	this	journey	but
no	end.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#26
Chapter	title:	None
26	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007265
ShortTitle:	GWIND26
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	search	for	truth	is	good	as	far	as	the	beginning	is	concerned,	but	a	moment
comes	when	you	 have	 to	 go	 beyond	 it	 because	 the	 very	 search	 is	 a	 tension,	 a
strain.	The	very	search	keeps	you	engaged,	occupied,	and	truth	is	found	only	in	a
state	 of	 absolute	 non-occupation,	 in	 total	 relaxation.	 Then	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a
search	for	truth.	That	is	the	paradox	that	has	to	be	understood.
Sannyas	begins	as	a	seeking,	as	a	searching.	Jesus	was	talking	to	beginners	when
he	said	'Seek,	and	ye	shall	find;	knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	unto	you,
ask	 and	 it	 shall	 be	 given.'	 It	 is	 perfectly	 right	 for	 those	 who	 are	 just	 in	 the
beginning.	Lao	Tzu	says	'Seek	and	ye	shall	never	find,	seeking	is	the	sure	way	of
missing.'	 He	 is	 also	 right,	 perfectly	 right,	 as	 right	 as	 Jesus.	 And	 there	 is	 no
contradiction.	He	is	talking	to	the	adepts,	he	is	talking	to	those	who	have	already
gone	 deep	 in	 the	 search.	Ultimately	 it	 has	 to	 be	 said:	 now	drop	 seeking.	 First
bring	it	to	a	climax,	to	the	peak	tension	of	search,	and	then	from	that	peak	relax,
forget	all	about	truth	--	and	suddenly	you	find	it	within	yourself.	Both	are	true.
Now,	 the	 Taoists	 don't	 believe	 in	 Jesus,	 they	 will	 argue	 against	 him;	 and	 the
Christians	won't	believe	in	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Lao	Tzu,	they	will	argue	against	him.	Both	are	in	a	state	of	ignorance.	As	I	see	it
these	are	two	aspects	of	the	same	coin.
But	I	want	you	to	remember	the	end;	the	beginning	has	already	begun.	Sannyas
is	an	initiation,	a	beginning	of	the	journey.	But	if	you	can	remember	the	end	then
you	will	never	go	astray.
Prayer	begins	 in	bliss	and	ends	 in	an	explosion	of	 fragrance.	Bliss	 is	 the	seed,
prayer	 the	flower,	and	then	naturally	when	the	flower	opens	 there	 is	 fragrance.
That	 fragrance	 is	 called	 Christ	 consciousness,	 Buddha	 consciousness,	 Krishna
consciousness	--	they	all	mean	the	same	thing.	They	only	indicate	one	thing,	that
the	 consciousness	 has	 become	 a	 fully	 opened	 lotus.	 But	 first	 remember
blissfulness.
Many	 people	 pray	 but	 their	 prayer	 goes	wrong	 from	 the	 very	 first	 step.	 They
pray	out	of	misery,	confusion,	sadness,	frustration.	They	pray	to	get	something,
their	prayer	is	nothing	but	a	disguised	form	of	desire.	It	is	not	thankfulness,	on
the	contrary	it	is	a	complaint.	True	prayer	is	simply	thankfulness	for	all	that	has
already	been	given	to	you.	True	prayer	is	a	dance,	a	rejoicing	because	life	is	so
beautiful	and	existence	is	so	exquisite	and	each	moment	is	such	ecstasy.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	become	singers,	dance,	 rejoicers.	The	materialists	have
always	been	condemned	by	 the	so-called	spiritualists	as	people	who	believe	 in
drink,	eat	and	be	merry.	But	I	say	to	my	sannyasins
'Eat,	drink	and	be	merry.'	There	is	nothing	of	materialism	in	it,	in	the	beginning
of	spirituality	because	only	a	cheerful	person	can	 thank	god.	Thankfulness	can
come	only	when	you	are	feeling	a	kind	of	fulfilment,	joy.
Live	 your	 life	with	 such	 intensity	 and	 passion	 that	 you	 can	 feel	 thankfulness,
then	everything	is	on	the	right	track,	in	the	right	direction.	Once	you	are	blissful
prayer	 is	 bound	 to	 follow;	 a	 blissful	 person	 cannot	 remain	 unprayerful.	 And
when	there	is	prayer	the	flower	is	opening.
If	one	can	manage	blissfulness	 then	everything	else	 follows	of	 its	own	accord:
prayer	 and	 fragrance,	 prayer	 and	 fulfilment,	 the	 flower	 and	 the	 sharing	 of	 the
beauty	of	the	flower	with	existence.
Ordinarily	man	 is	 just	 a	 heap	 of	 flowers.	 The	 flowers	 are	 not	 interconnected,
they	don't	have	any	organic	unity;	he	is	not	an	orchestra.	Many	instruments	are
being	 played	 but	 everybody	 is	 playing	 solo;	 hence	 there	 is	 great	 noise	 but	 no
music.	And	all	 his	 instruments	 are	beautiful.	All	 that	 is	 needed	 is	 to	 create	 an
organic	unity	between	them,	a	harmony.
Sannyas	 me	 ans	 transforming	 the	 heap	 of	 flowers	 into	 a	 garland.	 When	 you
make	 a	 garland	 all	 the	 flowers	 become	 joined	 by	 an	 invisible,	 hidden	 thread.
That's	what	meditation	is.	It	helps	you	to	bring	your	body,	mind,	heart,	and	soul
into	 a	 kind	 of	 deep	 harmony.	 And	 once	 your	 whole	 existence	 is	 in	 harmony,
great	bliss	arises,	great	benediction.
That's	what	religion	is	all	about.	It	has	nothing	to	do	with	god,	nothing	to	do	with
heaven	and	hell.
Those	 words	 are	 all	 theological	 nonsense.	 Basically	 religion	 is	 concerned	 in
creating	integrated	individuality,	it	is	a	science	of	integration.	And	once	you	are
integrated	 you	 are	 a	 conqueror,	 you	 are	 victorious,	 you	 have	 succeeded.	 You
have	used	the	opportunity	that	life	gives	to	you.	You	have	not	wasted	it	and	lived
in	vain.
Daniel	is	a	beautiful	word.	It	is	not	really	a	word	but	a	whole	philosophy.	Daniel
means,	god	is	my	judge.
Now,	it	contains	in	essence	the	whole	of	religion.	It	means	surrendering	yourself
to	god.	 It	means	not	 living	 the	 isolated	 life	of	 the	ego,	 it	means	becoming	one
with	the	whole.
And	that's	what	sannyas	is	too:	it	is	saying	yes	to	existence.	And	then	there	is	no
fear.	When	you	drop	your	ego	all	fear	disappears;	then	whatsoever	god	wills	you
do.	You	are	no	more	responsible	because	you	are	no	more.	Then	it	 is	all	up	 to
him.
With	this	trust	a	great	revolution	happens.	You	don't	exist	as	a	separate	entity	any
more.	It	is	like	a	dewdrop	slipping	into	the	ocean.	Of	course	it	loses	something,
it	loses	its	limited	definition,	its	identity,	but	it	gains	tremendously	--	it	becomes
the	whole	ocean!	So	the	loss	is	not	much,	the	gain	is	infinite.
Meditation	is	two	things	together.	It	is	a	death	and	a	resurrection	--	the	death	of
the	ego	and	 the	birth	of	 the	soul.	And	 it	happens	simultaneously:	here	you	die
and	here	you	are	reborn.	I	cannot	say	'Here	you	die	and	there	you	are	reborn;'	it
happens	simultaneously,	in	the	now.	There	is	not	even	a	gap	of	a	split	second.	It
is	as	if	the	clouds	disperse	an	d	suddenly	the	sun	is	there.	It	was	always	there,	it
was	only	hidden	behind	 the	 clouds.	Your	 real	 life	 is	 already	 there,	 just	 hidden
behind	the	cloud	of	the	ego.	Ego	is	a	dark	cloud,	but	just	a	cloud;	nothing	very
substantial	 in	 it.	 It	 can	 be	 dispersed	 very	 easily,	 and	 the	 art	 of	 dispersing	 it	 is
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
meditation.
Meditation	means	becoming	aware,	alert,	watchful.	The	more	alert	you	are,	the
more	you	become	aware	that	there	is	no	ego.	You	are,	but	you	are	not	separate
from	existence,	you	are	part	and	parcel	of	it.
This	feeling	of	oneness	with	existence	brings	great	ecstasy	because	it	means	you
are	eternal;	you	have	always	been	here	and	you	will	always	be	here.	That	means
immortality.
If	the	ego	dies	we	disappear	as	mortal	beings	and	we	appear	as	immortal	beings.
So	die	to	be	reborn'
That's	 the	meaning	 of	 the	 Christian	 symbol	 of	 the	 cross.	 But	 Christians	 have
missed	 the	meaning	of	 the	symbol	as	all	 religions	have	missed	 the	message	of
the	 founders.	 Buddhists	 have	 missed	 Buddha,	 Christians	 have	 missed	 Christ,
Mohammed	ans	have	missed	Mohammed.	It	is	a	very	strange	phenomenon	that
the	followers	are	doing	something	totally	opposite.
They	 go	 on	 calling	 themselves	 Christians	 but	 they	 are	 really	 killing	 the	 very
spirit	of	Christ.
Christ	was	not	crucified	by	the	Romans	and	the	Jews.	They	could	not	kill	him,
they	only	killed	the	body.
But	 if	you	want	 to	know	where	exactly	he	has	been	crucified,	 the	place	 is	 the
Vatican;	 he	 has	 been	 crucified	 there	 by	 the	 popes.	 And	 they	 have	 been
continuously	killing	him.
The	 cross	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 a	 literal	 meaning,	 the	 cross	 simply	 means
meditation.	 It	 simply	means	 dying	 to	 the	 ego;	 hence	 the	 story	 that	 after	 three
days	Jesus	is	resurrected.	Between	death	and	resurrection	there	is	a	gap	of	three
days.	Those	three	days	simply	represent	the	body,	the	mind	an	d	the	heart.
First	the	body	dies.	You	start	dropping	the	idea	of	a	separate	body;	you	can	see
the	stupidity	of	it.	Each	moment	existence	goes	on	pouring	new	energy	into	you
--	how	can	you	think	yourself	separate?	If	your	breathing	is	cut	off	you	will	be
dead.	And	it	is	not	only	breathing;	every	day	you	are	taking	in	food	and	water,
and	 existence	 goes	 on	 pouring	 into	 you.	 Every	 day	 you	 are	 dropping	 out
everything	 that	 has	 died;	 life	 goes	 on	 pouring	 in	 and	 dead	 things	 are	 being
thrown	out	of	the	body.	The	body	is	like	a	river,	continuously	getting	more	life
and	dropping	all	that	is	dead.	That	represents	the	first	death,	the	first	day.
Then	 the	mind,	 which	 is	 a	 little	 subtler,	 thoughts	 --	 they	 also	 come	 from	 the
outside.	Just	as	air	and	water	and	food	come	from	the	outside	your	mind	goes	on
collecting	thoughts	from	everywhere.	The	mind	dies	as	a	separate	entity.
And	then	the	most	subtle	thing	happens	on	the	third	day	--	they	are	just	symbolic
these	three	days	--
feeling,	 emotion,	 the	heart	 dies.	And	 then	 there	 is	 resurrection.	 In	 the	East	we
call	it	the	birth	of	the	fourth,	turiya:	turiya	means	the	fourth.
When	these	three	have	disappeared,	have	become	one	with	existence,	suddenly
you	 become	 aware	 of	 a	 being	which	 is	 not	 yours,	which	 is	 universal.	 That	 is
resurrection.
My	 idea	 of	 prayer	 is	 not	 the	 ordinary	 idea	 of	 so-called	 religions.	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	Christians	--
they	all	go	on	praying.	But	that	is	not	my	idea	of	prayer	and	I	don't	think	it	is	the
right	kind	of	prayer.
Prayer	 does	 not	 need	 any	words.	What	 is	 there	 to	 say	 to	 god?	 --	 he	 knows	 it
already.	What	is	there	to	ask?	--	he	has	given	it	already.	And	if	something	is	not
given,	that	simply	means	it	is	not	needed.	He	is	wiser	than	you,	but	people	go	on
advising	him:	Do	this,	do	that,	give	me	this,	give	me	that	--	as	if	god	is	not	wise
enough.	All	your	prayer	is	just	advice,	and	people	go	on	persisting	every	day.	It
is	 a	kind	of	nagging,	nagging	god	 'How	 long	will	you	not	 listen?	 I	will	go	on
asking	 morning	 and	 evening.'	 Mohammedans	 are	 the	 most	 persistent	 --	 five
times	a	day.	They	must	have	driven	god	mad.	Christians	are	better;	at	least	they
do	it	only	on	sunday.	Hindus	are	even	better;	they	do	it	only	once	in	a	while,	on
the	festival	days,	otherwise	they	don't	bother	much.
To	me	prayer	has	nothing	to	do	with	words.	It	is	a	silent	gratefulness;	it	is	utterly
silent,	but	a	deep	gratefulness.	It	is	possible	only	if	you	learn	how	to	be	blissful,
otherwise	there	will	be	nothing	to	be	grateful	for.
So	 I	 teach	my	 sannyasins	 not	 prayer	 but	 bliss.	Dance,	 sing,	 be	 blissful,	 be	 of
great	cheer.	Let	your	life	be	a	life	of	love	and	laughter	and	you	will	start	feeling
a	 subtle	 presence	 of	 prayerfulness	 in	 you.	 And	 that	 prayerfulness	 will	 not	 be
Christian,	Hindu	or	Mohammedan,	it	will	be	simply	prayerfulness.
A	 true	 religious	 person	 cannot	 be	 Christian,	 Hindu	 or	 Mohammedan;	 he	 is
simply	religious.	He	has	a	prayerful	being	--	that's	all.
It	is	only	possible	for	a	blissful	person	to	trust	in	god.	But	for	centuries	our	saints
have	 been	 sad,	 they	 all	 carried	 long	 faces;	 hence	 I	 say	 that	 they	 were	 not
religious.	They	were	just	egoistic	people,	they	were	using	religion	to	fulfill	their
egos.	They	were	pretenders.
True	religion	is	bound	to	be	a	rejoicing.	One	needs	not	believe	in	god,	one	needs
to	believe	in	bliss,	and	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
then	god	comes	in	from	the	backdoor.	And	remember:	god	always	comes	from
the	backdoor	like	a	thief.
You	know	who	 is	 translating	 for	you	 -	his	name	 is	Haridas!	and	Hari	means	a
thief!	Now	I	am	coming	in	through	the	thief.	He	comes	in	from	the	backdoor	and
snatches	your	heart	and	runs	away!
I	have	already	done	it	with	you!	And	whatsoever	remains	Haridas	will	take.
How	long	will	you	be	here?
-	I	will	leave	on	the	fourth	of	August	and	come	back	in	October.
-	Come	back	because	Germans	are	needed!
Hitherto	the	whole	past	of	humanity	has	been	in	some	way	or	other	condemning
life	and	its	joys.	It	has	been	a	life-negative	approach,	and	to	be	life-negative	is	to
be	against	God	because	life	is	God.
Hence	 I	 stand	 against	 all	 so-called	 religions;	 not	 against	 Christ,	 not	 against
Buddha,	 not	 against	 Krishna,	 but	 certainly	 against	 Christians,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	 Buddhists,	 because	 these	 people	 are	 all	 life-negative.	 They
destroy	something	very	delicate	and	valuable	in	you;	they	make	you	feel	guilty
about	your	joy.	My	effort	here	is	to	help	you	be	free	of	all	guilt	and	rejoice	in	life
like	 small	 children.	 Rejoice	 in	 everything,	 even	 small	 things.	 If	 you	 start
rejoicing,	even	a	cup	of	tea	starts	having	a	sacred	significance.
You	 can	 sip	 the	 tea	 in	 such	 a	 prayerful	 way,	 with	 such	 gratitude,	 with	 such
meditativeness,	that	there	is	no	need	to	go	to	any	church.	And	in	fact	they	won't
allow	you	in	with	a	cup	of	tea...	or	a	bottle	of	beer!	Beer	is	a	little	higher.	For	the
beginners	a	cup	of	tea,	for	the	adepts	a	bottle	of	beer.
My	whole	approach	is	to	rejoice	in	everything	and	help	others	also	to	be	happy,
because	bliss	is	divine.
Love	 is	 the	only	bridge	 to	victory.	But	a	very	 strange	bridge	 it	 is,	because	 the
first	requirement	of	love	is	surrender.	It	is	victory	through	surrender;	hence	it	has
a	 tremendous	 beauty.	 It	 is	 non-aggressive,	 it	 is	 receptive;	 it	 wins	 not	 by
conquering,	it	wins	by	being	conquered.
Those	 who	 are	 trying	 to	 conquer	 God	 are	 fools,	 they	 cannot	 do	 it.	 The	 wise
people	 have	 surrendered	 to	 God;	 they	 have	 invited	 him	 to	 conquer	 them,	 to
possess	them.	God	cannot	be	possessed	by	you	but	you	can	allow	him	to	possess
you.	That's	what	love	is:	it	allows	one	to	be	possessed.	It	is	non-possessive,	it	has
no	 desire	 to	 possess.	 Its	 only	 longing	 is	 to	 be	 possessed,	 totally	 possessed,	 so
nothing	is	left	in	oneself	of	one's	own.
That's	what	sannyas	is	all	about:	a	tremendous	and	total	surrender	--	and	in	that
very	surrender	victory	happens.
Hari	 is	 one	 of	 the	 names	 of	 God,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 most	 beautiful.	 There	 are
thousands	 of	 names	 of	 God	 in	 different	 languages	 of	 the	 world.	 Sufis	 have
ninety-nine	names	of	God.	All	are	beautiful,	but	Hari	is	unique.
There	 is	 no	 other	 name	 which	 can	 be	 compared	 with	 Hari.	 It	 really	 says
something	about	God,	and	to	say	something	about	God	is	almost	impossible.	But
it	manages	to	say	something	about	the	unsayable:	it	says	God	is	a	thief.
And	if	you	allow	him,	he	is	always	ready	to	steal	your	heart.	And	the	moment	it
happens	you	have	come	 to	know	 the	greatest	 splendor	of	your	 life.	All	 else	 is
ordinary.	When	you	have	lost	your	heart	to	God,	when	his	arrow	has	penetrated
your	heart	totally,	you	have	come	to	know	that	which	is	immortal,	deathless.
To	be	stolen	by	God	is	the	greatest	honor.	There	can	be	nothing	higher	than	that,
that	you	have	been	thought	 to	be	worthy,	 that	you	have	been	chosen,	 that	your
heart	has	been	thought	to	be	precious	enough	for	God	to	steal	it.
The	whole	preparation	of	sannyas	is	so	that	God	is	tempted	to	steal	you	and	your
heart.	And	my	 sannyasins	 can	 rest	 assured:	 they	 are	 becoming	more	 beautiful
every	day,	and	God	is	bound	to	be	tempted.
Many	hearts	are	going	to	be	stolen	in	these	coming	few	years,	twenty	years;	in
the	last	part	of	this	century	millions	of	hearts	are	going	to	be	stolen	by	God.
Harimurti	means	an	image	of	God.	So	first	let	God	steal	your	heart	and	then	you
also	become	a	thief!
The	Golden	Wind
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Chapter	#28
Chapter	title:	None
28	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007275
ShortTitle:	GWIND28
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
There	have	been	two	kinds	of	religion	in	the	world:	the	religions	of	meditation
and	 the	 religions	 of	 prayer.	 And	 they	 have	 existed	 like	 enemies;	 they	 have
divided	the	whole	of	humanity.
For	example,	Buddhism	is	a	religion	of	meditation,	Christianity	is	a	religion	of
prayer,	and	up	 to	now	 there	has	been	no	bridge	between	 them.	 It	has	not	only
divided	 humanity,	 it	 has	 divided	 each	 human	 being	 into	 two	 parts	 --	 because
man's	wholeness	needs	to	be	fulfilled	in	its	wholeness.	And	man	has	both	aspects
his	being.
One	aspect	is	fulfilled	by	meditation,	another	aspect	is	fulfilled	by	prayer.	And	if
one	sticks	to	one	against	the	other,	then	he	remains	only	half.	Hence	in	the	past
the	so-called	holy	men	were	not	really	holy,	because	they	were	not	whole.	It	is
because	of	this	schizophrenic	division	that	religion	has	not	been	able	to	bring	the
revolution	it	is	capable	of.
My	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 create	 a	 bridge.	 My	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 both	 a	 man	 of
meditation	and	a	man	of	prayer,	together.
Meditation	means	 a	 state	 of	 thoughtless	 awareness.	 It	 is	 in	 a	way	 negative;	 it
rejects	thoughts	and	creates	a	silent	state	inside	you.	It	is	beautiful,	that	silence,
but	it	is	lacking	something.	It	is	lacking	music,	there	is	no	poetry	in	it,	there	is	no
dance	in	it.	It	is	a	kind	of	dead	silence,	no	song	arises	out	of	it.
Prayer	means	the	heart	is	full	of	love.	It	is	a	positive	approach.	Prayer	can	dance,
prayer	 can	 sing,	 prayer	 can	 be	 a	 celebration,	 but	 without	 meditation	 all	 that
celebration	remains	superficial,	noisy.	Yes,	there	is	a	great	liveliness	in	it	but	that
liveliness	is	childish,	not	mature.
Maturity	comes	through	meditation,	joy	comes	through	prayer.	Centering	comes
through	meditation,	dancing	comes	through	prayer.	A	man	is	really	blessed	who
can	 remain	 centred	 and	 yet	 in	 a	 dance,	 who	 c	 an	 become	 the	 centre	 of	 the
cyclone.	And	that	is	my	vision	of	a	sannyasin,	a	true	religious	person,	the	whole
person.
And	it	is	possible,	there	is	no	difficulty	in	it,	there	is	no	intrinsic	problem	in	it.
Of	 course	 because	 it	 has	 to	 fulfil	 two	 apparently	 contradictory	 dimensions
together,	 in	 the	 past	 people	 chose	 one.	 It	was	 easier,	 less	 complicated	but	 less
rich,	obviously.
Man	has	 to	grow	from	simplicity	 to	complexity,	but	 the	complexity	should	not
lose	track	of	simplicity,	otherwise	it	becomes	insane.	It	should	remain	rooted	in
simplicity	 and	 yet	 it	 should	 be	 complex.	 Then	 one	 has	 a	 tremendous	 beauty
because	when	opposites	meet	as	complementaries	they	give	you	dimensions;	you
are	not	one-dimensional.
So	 remember	 it:	 be	 meditative,	 be	 prayerful.	 Through	 meditation	 create
emptiness	and	through	prayer	create	love	to	fill	it,	so	the	emptiness	becomes	an
overflowing	of	love.
One	can	be	rich	by	possessing	many	things	but	that	richness	is	pseudo,	it	is	just
befooling	oneself.	You	come	empty-handed	into	the	world	and	you	will	have	to
go	empty-handed;	all	your	possessions	will	have	 to	be	 left	behind.	So	you	can
waste	 your	 life	 in	 accumulating	 them	 but	 you	 are	 not	 really	 gaining	 anything
through	 life.	On	 the	 contrary	 you	 are	wasting	 a	 tremendous	 opportunity	 to	 be
rich.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
The	 real	 richness	 is	 something	 inner;	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 things.	 And
remember:	I	am	not	against	things	--	use,	enjoy	things,	they	have	their	utility.	I
am	not	anti-world,	not	anti-life,	not	anti	--	enjoyment	--
enjoy	 life	 in	 all	 its	 beauty.	 But	 remember	 that's	 not	 all,	 that	 is	 only	 a	 very
peripheral	world.	Your	real	treasure	is	within	you.	So	don't	get	lost	in	the	jungle
of	the	world,	otherwise	you	will	remain	poor	and	you	will	die	poor.
Jesus	says	'Blessed	are	the	poor	for	theirs	is	the	kingdom	of	god.'	I	would	like	to
say	 'Blessed	 are	 the	 rich	 for	 theirs	 is	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god,'	 although	 what	 he
means	by	poor	is	exactly	the	same	as	what	I	mean	by	rich,	but	I	am	talking	more
directly.
When	 he	 says	 'Blessed	 are	 the	 poor	 in	 spirit,'	 he	 simply	means	 those	who	 are
egoless,	humble,	simple.
innocent	 --	 but	 that	 is	 what	 I	 call	 richness.	 Why	 call	 it	 poverty?	 --	 it	 is	 not
poverty.	The	person	with	an	ego	is	poor;	the	person	with	pretentions	is	the	poor
person,	 Alexander	 the	 Great	 is	 a	 poor	 person,	 not	 Jesus;	 Jesus	 is	 the	 richest
person	the	world	has	ever	known.	But	I	know	by	his	idea	of	poverty	he	means
exactly	what	 I	mean	 by	 richness.	But	 I	 like	 a	 direct	 approach.	Why	 go	 round
about?	 --	 first	 calling	 it	 poverty	 and	 then	 explaining	 it	 so	 that	 it	 becomes
richness.	Why	not	 say	 it	directly?	But	 there	 is	a	 reason	why	he	used	 the	word
'poverty';	 that	word	has	a	 tremendous	appeal	for	 the	so-called	religious	people.
They	have	always	worshipped	poverty,	although	their	poverty	is	totally	different
from	what	Jesus	calls	poverty;	hence	there	is	bound	to	be	misunderstanding.
Once	a	young	man,	a	Jesus	freak,	came	to	me.	He	was	 living	as	poor	a	 life	as
possible,	without	 shoes,	with	 rotten	 clothes.	And	 he	was	 travelling	 on	 foot	 all
over	 India.	 From	 the	Himalayas	 he	was	 going	 to	 the	 south,	 and	 just	 living	 by
begging.
When	he	passed	the	town	I	was	in	somebody	told	him	about	me	and	he	came	to
see	me.	And	I	said
'What	 are	 you	 doing?	What	 is	 this	 nonsense?'	 He	 said	 'You	 call	 it	 nonsense?
Jesus	says	"Blessed	are	the	poor	in	spirit."'	I	said	he	does	not	say	that	just	by	not
wearing	shoes	you	become	poor	in	spirit	or	just	by	begging	you	become	poor	in
spirit.	As	far	as	I	can	see	you	are	tremendously	egoistic.	The	moment	I	said	this
he	became	very	angry,	almost	ready	to	fight.
I	 said	 'Sit	 down.	 That's	 what	 I	 am	 saying	 --	 that	 you	 are	 not	 humble.	 Your
humbleness	 is	 just	 a	 strategy	 of	 the	 ego	 and	 you	 are	 using	 Jesus'	 words	 in	 a
totally	wrong	context;	you	have	not	understood	them.'
But	 that's	 what	 Christians	 down	 the	 ages	 have	 been	 doing	 with	 the	 words	 of
Christ.	And	 that	 is	going	 to	be	done	 to	almost	all	enlightened	people	and	 their
teachings.	 Hence	 my	 effort	 is	 to	 be	 as	 direct	 as	 possible,	 so	 there	 is	 less
possibility	of	misunderstanding.
I	don't	want	to	be	metaphorical,	I	don't	want	to	use	parables	because	they	can	be
interpreted	 in	many	ways.	 I	don't	want	 to	use	 traditional	words,	or	 if	 I	have	 to
use	 them	 because	 there	 are	 no	 other	words	 available	 then	 I	want	 to	make	my
meaning	 as	 clear	 as	 possible,	 as	 definite	 as	 possible.	 In	 that	 sense	 I	 am	 very
logical	and	mathematical.
I	call	meditation	the	greatest	richness	because	it	makes	you	aware	of	your	own
infinite	treasure.	It	makes	you	a	master	of	the	kingdom	of	god.	And	the	only	key
to	that	kingdom	is	through	meditation,	through	silence,	watchfulness,	awareness.
Man	can	have	knowledge	but	not	wisdom.	Man	can	achieve	as	much	knowledge
as	he	wants.	It	is	easy,	you	just	need	a	little	mind	effort,	a	little	exertion.	You	can
go	on	feeding	your	memory	system.	It	is	a	computer;	you	can	accumulate	whole
libraries.	But	wisdom	is	not	something	that	you	can	accumulate	because	it	does
not	 happen	 through	 the	 mind	 at	 all.	 It	 happens	 through	 the	 heart,	 it	 happens
through	love,	not	through	logic.
When	the	heart	is	open	with	love,	with	trust,	when	the	heart	is	surrendered	to	the
whole,	 then	a	new	kind	of	 insight	arises	 in	you,	a	clarity	a	 tremendously	deep
understanding	 of	 what	 life	 is	 all	 about,	 of	 who	 you	 are,	 of	 why	 this	 whole
existence	exists	in	the	first	place.	All	the	secrets	are	revealed,	but	through	love
not	 through	 logic,	 through	 the	 heart	 not	 through	 the	 head.	 God	 has	 a	 direct
connection	with	the	heart,	no	connection	with	the	head	at	all.	So	if	one	wants	to
approach	god	the	way	goes	through	the	heart.
Once	 you	 have	 known	wisdom	 through	 the	 heart	 then	 you	 can	 use	 your	mind
also	as	a	good	servant,	then	you	can	use	even	the	knowledge	accumulated	by	the
mind	 in	 the	 service	 of	wisdom	 --	 but	 not	 before	 you	 have	 known	 through	 the
heart.	Hence,	rather	than	wasting	time	in	accumulating	unnecessary	information,
and	 people	 go	 on	 accumulating	 such	 stupid	 information,	 which	 is	 utterly
ridiculous.	 If	you	 look	in	 the	history	books	 ...	children	are	forced	 to	remember
the	names	of	stupid	kings	and	queens	and	their	birth	date	and	their	death	date	--
and	what	do	they	have	to	do	with	this	poor	child?
Once	a	 teacher	asked	a	child	 'If	Adam	had	never	 left	 the	garden	of	Eden	what
would	have	happened?'
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
child	said	'One	thing	is	certain:	there	would	have	been	no	history	and	no	history
class!	It	all	began	with	Adam	getting	out	of	the	garden	of	Eden.'
It	is	rumoured	that	the	first	words	that	Adam	uttered	when	he	was	coming	out	of
the	gate...	 to	Eve	he	said	 'We	are	passing	through	a	great	crisis.'And	since	then
we	have	always	been	passing	through	a	great	crisis.	It	is	always	a	crisis.	Not	for
a	single	moment	have	the	crises	stopped:	one	crisis	after	another	crisis.
And	the	poor	children	have	to	read	history.
When	I	was	a	student	in	the	school	that	was	a	constant	problem	for	my	teachers,
because	I	would	insist
'What	is	the	purpose?	Why	should	I	know	about	this	man?	Did	he	know	anything
about	me?	Then	why	should	 I	bother?'	My	history	 teacher	would	simply	close
his	eyes	and	sit	silently	--	what	 to	do?	Many	times	he	sent	me	to	 the	principal
saying	 'Please	 explain	 to	 this	 boy.	 He	 asks	 such	 questions	 that	 cannot	 be
answered.	And	in	a	way	he	is	right...'	because	what	do	I	have	to	do	with	some
Henry,	 some	Edward?	What	do	 I	have	 to	do	with	 these	people/	And	still	 I	 am
wondering	 because	 I	 have	 not	 come	 across	 any	 situation	 in	 which	 they	 were
needed.	 And	 I	 don't	 think	 they	 will	 ever	 be	 needed.	 And	 all	 kinds	 of
geographies...
Don't	waste	your	time	with	information.	All	the	universities	are	wasting	peoples'
lives.	Almost	ninety-nine	per	cent	that	they	teach	is	rubbish.
The	one	per	cent,	it	seems	enters	the	rubbish	without	their	knowledge,	otherwise
they	would	stop	that	too.	Somehow	it	gets	mixed	into	the	rubbish	and	enters	the
curriculums	and	the	texts;	otherwise	it	is	all	absurd.
D.H.	Lawrence	had	the	suggestion	that	if	for	one	hundred	years	we	could	close
all	the	schools	and	universities	humanity	would	be	immensely	benefitted.	And	I
agree	with	him:	it	would	be	the	greatest	blessing	to	humanity	if	for	one	hundred
years	there	were	no	school,	no	college,	no	university	--	all	were	finished.	For	one
hundred	years,	a	holiday.	Man	would	become	fresh,	young	again	and	he	would
forget	 all	 about	 Alexander	 the	Great	 and	Napoleon	 and	 Ivan	 the	 Terrible	 and
Genghis	Khan	and	Tamerlane.	It	would	be	such	an	unburdening	and	man	could
start	from	ABC.
But	 each	 person	 can	 do	 it.	 It	 may	 not	 be	 possible	 to	 persuade	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	 to	 stop	 all	 the	 colleges	 and	 universities,	 but	 individuals	 can	 be
persuaded.	And	that's	what	I	go	on	doing	with	my	sannyasins:	I	persuade	them	to
drop	all	nonsense	and	give	the	uttermost	priority	to	their	heart.
Move	 your	 energy	 to	 the	 heart,	 be	 more	 loving	 and	 you	 are	 in	 for	 a	 great
surprise.	As	your	love	grows,	as	your	love	petals	open	and	your	heart	becomes	a
lotus,	 something	 tremendously	 beautiful	 starts	 descending	 on	 you	 --	 that	 is
wisdom.	And	wisdom	brings	freedom.
Knowledge	brings	information,	wisdom	brings	transformation.
Even	a	drop	of	bliss	is	an	ocean.	One	can	be	drowned	in	a	single	drop	of	bliss.	In
fact	 a	 single	 drop	 of	 bliss	 is	 immeasurable.	 It	 is	 enough,	 more	 than	 enough,
because	 bliss	 has	 no	 boundaries,	 it	 is	 infinite,	 and	 even	 a	 drop	 of	 infinity	 is
infinite.	It	is	as	vast	as	the	sky.
The	only	reason	why	we	cannot	attain	it	is	that	we	are	clinging	to	the	ego	which
keeps	us	confined,	which	makes	us	very	small.	If	we	want	to	be	blissful	we	have
to	 drop	 our	 boundaries.	 We	 have	 to	 forget	 that	 we	 are	 Christians,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	 that	we	are	communists,	 socialists,	 fascists.	We	have	 to	 forget
all	boundaries	that	ideologies	draw	around	us	--	religions	and	cultures,	traditions,
conventions,	moralities.
Once	all	 these	boundaries	are	dropped,	 suddenly	you	are	moving	 into	a	 totally
new	world,	a	world	which	is	unbounded.	You	are	getting	out	of	the	prison.
To	be	 a	Christian	 is	 to	be	 in	 a	prison.	 Jesus	was	never	 a	Christian,	 remember.
And	 he	 rebelled	 against	 the	 Jews,	 that's	 why	 they	 crucified	 him.	 He	 rebelled
against	all	boundaries,	against	all	that	was	past,	He	was	a	rebel.	So	was	Buddha,
so	was	 Lao	 Tzu,	 and	 so	 is	 the	 case	with	 everyone	who	 has	 ever	 experienced
bliss.
Drop	 the	 boundaries,	 definitions,	 identities	 and	 the	 doors	 are	 open	 --	 there	 is
nobody	barring	the	path	--
and	one	immediately	plunges	into	the	world	of	bliss.
Knowledge	 never	makes	 you	 blissful;	 on	 the	 contrary	 it	makes	 you	more	 and
more	miserable.	And	 it	can	be	easily	observed,	 it	 is	a	 factual	phenomenon.	As
man	has	 grown	more	 and	more	 in	 knowledge,	 he	 has	 become	more	 and	more
miserable.	 Whenever	 a	 society	 is	 well-educated,	 people	 start	 feeling	 life	 is
meaningless,	people	start	feeling	a	kind	of	deep	boredom.
Move	 to	 the	 primitive	 societies,	 go	 to	 the	 aboriginals	who	 are	 still	 living	 five
thousand	 years	 back	 and	 you	 will	 be	 surprised	 by	 one	 thing:	 they	 don't	 have
anything	to	be	blissful	about	but	they	are	blissful.	They	don't	have	big	aeroplanes
and	 palaces	 and	 television	 sets,	 they	 have	 no	 technology,	 they	 are	 living	 in	 a
primitive	way,	but	one	thing	is	very	clear,	very	obvious,	they	are	blissful	--	poor,
but	blissful.	Why	is	it	so?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Move	to	a	very	knowledgeable	society	where	education	has	become	available	to
almost	one	hundred	per	cent	of	the	people	and	you	will	be	surprised:	people	look
very	miserable.	They	have	 lost	something	rather	 than	gaining.	 In	accumulating
knowledge	 they	 have	 forgotten	 to	move	 into	 the	world	 of	wisdom.	They	have
made	knowledge	a	substitute,	and	remember	substitutes	never	fulfil.
You	love	a	woman	--	that	is	a	tremendously	beautiful	experience	--	but	you	can
get	a	substitute	through	a	prostitute.	Now	in	America	they	have	substitute	wives.
And	psychologists	are	suggesting	to	people	to	go	to	a	substitute	just	for	a	change
because	 they	 are	 so	 bored	 with	 their	 wife,	 bored	 with	 their	 family.	 But	 a
substitute	wife	 is	after	all	 a	 substitute;	 it	 is	 a	plastic	 flower.	She	does	not	 love
you,	you	don't	love	her.	At	the	most	it	can	be	a	superficial	meeting.	At	the	most
it	can	be	sexual,	but	it	can't	have	intimacy;	it	can	never	be	spiritual.	You	use	the
woman	and	the	woman	uses	you.	It	is	a	monetary	relationship;	you	are	ready	to
pay,	she	is	ready	to	sell.
Now	there	are	male	prostitutes	also!	Of	course	not	in	poor	countries	like	India,
but	 in	England,	 in	America	 you	 can	 find	male	 prostitutes.	These	 are	 the	 great
things	 that	are	happening	 through	women's	 liberation.	 If	men	can	have	women
prostitutes,	 why	 cannot	 woman	 enjoy	male	 prostitutes?	 --	 equality	 after	 all	 is
equality.	So	people	can	go	to	foolish	extremes,	absurd	extremes.
But	 slowly	slowly	everything	 is	becoming	a	 substitute,	The	 true	 thing	goes	on
disappearing.	Instead	of	the	true	thing	some	substitute	takes	its	place	because	a
substitute	can	be	manufactured,	 it	 is	easily	available,	 sellable,	marketable.	The
real	thing	is	not	sellable	or	marketable;	you	have	to	deserve	it.
Knowledge	 is	a	substitute.	You	can	go	 to	any	university,	 to	any	 library,	 to	any
museum,	and	you	can	accumulate	much	knowledge,	but	for	wisdom	you	cannot
go	anywhere.	In	fact	you	have	to	stop	going,	you	have	to	be	very	still	and	silent.
You	have	to	dig	deep	within	yourself,	to	the	very	rock-bottom	of	your	being.
It	 is	 arduous,	 but	 when	 you	 are	 absolutely	 silent,	 when	 all	 thoughts	 have
disappeared,	 when	 your	 eyes	 are	 as	 clear	 as	 a	 mirror	 without	 any	 dust,	 you
become	capable	of	seeing	that	which	is.	That	is	wisdom.
And	simultaneously,	as	wisdom	happens	your	heart	starts	dancing.	In	fact	for	the
first	time	you	hear	the	REAL	heart	beat.	For	the	first	time	you	hear	the	song	of
the	heart.	For	the	first	time	your	whole	being	--
body,	mind,	heart,	soul	--	are	all	dancing	together	and	there	is	tremendous	grace.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 achieve	 it.	 That's	 the	 only	 thing	 worth	 achieving,	 a
blissful	wisdom.
Blessed	are	the	blissful,	because	they	have	already	entered	into	the	kingdom	of
god.	Not	knowing	 that	 they	are	entering	 into	god's	heart	 they	have	entered.	 In
fact	god	can	never	be	found	directly.	You	cannot	approach	god	directly,	he	has
no	address;	he	has	no	name	either,	no	form.	If	you	search	and	seek	god	you	will
never	find	him.
It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 fact	 that	 humanity	 has	 slowly	 slowly	 turned	 atheistic,
because	 people	 have	 looked	 for	 god	 and	 they	 have	 not	 found	 him.	 They
searched,	 they	 wasted	 their	 lives	 and	 finally	 they	 discovered	 it	 had	 been	 an
exercise	in	utter	futility.
But	the	whole	responsibility	falls	on	the	shoulders	of	the	priests,	the	popes,	the
shankaracharyas,	 the	 imams,	 the	 ayatollah,	 the	 so-called	 religious	 people,	 the
religious	preachers,	because	they	go	on	telling	people	to	search	for	god,	to	seek
god	--	and	that	is	patent	nonsense'
I	say	seek	bliss	and	you	will	find	god.	Seek	god	and	you	will	not	find	god	and
you	will	become	more	miserable	than	you	were	ever	before	because	not	finding
something	on	which	you	have	staked	your	whole	life	is	bound	to	make	you	very
frustrated.	 Forget	 all	 about	 god;	 just	 search	 for	 bliss,	 find	 the	 causes	 of	 your
misery	and	drop	those	causes,	remove	those	causes	from	the	very	roots.
And	you	will	 be	 surprised:	 as	 all	 the	 causes	of	misery	are	dropped	bliss	 starts
growing	 in	 you.	 And	 in	 blissful	 moments	 you	 will	 become	 aware	 of	 a	 new
presence	 surrounding	 you	 --	 and	 not	 only	 you	 but	 the	 whole	 existence.	 That
presence	is	god.
God	is	not	a	person	but	a	presence.	God	is	not	god	but	godliness.
Bliss	comes	like	a	breeze,	it	comes	like	fresh	air.	You	cannot	see	it	but	you	can
feel	it.	It	is	not	tangible,	it	is	not	material.	You	cannot	show	it	to	anybody;	it	is
not	objective.	But	you	can	breathe	it	and	you	can	be	tremendously	enriched	and
nourished	by	it.	In	fact	if	somebody	is	open	to	you	he	will	also	feel	your	bliss.	It
cannot	be	proved	--	that	is	true.	It	cannot	be	proved	in	a	scientific	way	because	it
is	not	an	object,	 it	 is	 a	 subjective	experience,	 something	 inner,	very	 inner.	But
when	one	 feels	 it	 there	 is	 absolute	 certainty,	 there	 is	 no	doubt	 at	 all.	Doubt	 is
impossible	in	those	moments.	It	is	impossible	even	to	ask	a	question	about	it.	It
is	so	self-evident	and	so	totally	convincing	that	it	is	not	possible	for	there	to	be
any	question	mark.	It	is	only	in	such	moments	that	trust	is	born.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
God	cannot	be	believed	in,	and	those	who	believe	in	god	are	simply	deceiving
themselves,	 they	 are	 dishonest	 people.	 My	 observation	 is	 that	 the	 so-called
religious	 people	 are	 the	 most	 insincere	 and	 dishonest	 people	 in	 the	 world.
Atheists	 are	 more	 sincere,	 honest,	 authentic;	 theists	 are	 hocus-pocus,	 bogus,
pretenders,	hypocrites,	 living	a	double	kind	of	 life:	saying	one	thing	and	doing
exactly	 the	 opposite.	 They	 have	 two	 doors	 to	 their	 life;	 the	 front-door,	 where
they	 are	 Christians	 and	 Hindus	 and	 Mohammedans	 and	 are	 reading	 the
Bhagavad	Gita	and	the	Koran	and	the	Bible	and	having	all	the	paraphernalia	of
their	religious	ritual.
And	they	have	a	backdoor	also	where	you	will	find	their	reality.	And	you	will	be
surprised:	you	were	thinking	this	man	was	one	and	this	man	is	not	one,	this	man
is	not	even	two,	this	man	is	many.	He	has	many	masks	and	he	goes	on	changing
his	masks.
In	fact	people	have	become	so	skilful	that	they	don't	need	to	change	their	mask,
it	 is	 almost	 an	 autonomous	 process.	 The	mask	 changes	 itself;	 as	 the	 situation
changes	 the	mask	changes.	You	can	observe	 it	 in	others,	you	can	observe	 it	 in
yourself.	You	know	when	you	are	smiling	truly	and	when	you	are	simply	smiling
just	 to	 deceive,	 because	 a	 smile	 is	 expected;	 you	 are	 fulfilling	 a	 certain
expectation.	But	 it	 is	only	on	 the	 lips,	an	exercise	of	 the	 lips	maybe	but	 it	has
nothing	else	behind	it,	it	is	a	facade.
A	real	trust	is	not	a	belief,	it	is	an	experience.	God	has	to	be	experienced.	And
never	believe	before	you	come	 to	 experience	 --	never	never	 --	 because	once	 a
belief	enters	your	being	 it	poisons	you.	Drop	all	beliefs	because	god	 is	 --	why
believe?	Why	not	experience?
I	 am	 not	 a	 teacher.	 I	 don't	 give	 you	 a	 dogma	 or	 a	 philosophy;	 I	 am	 simply	 a
witness.	I	say	'I	have	experienced,	so	YOU	can	experience.'	And	there	is	no	need
at	all	to	believe.
I	was	absolutely	atheistic	and	I	am	tremendously	fortunate	that	I	never	believed
in	god	because	if	I	had	I	would	have	never	known.	I	never	believed	in	anything
at	all.	I	was	such	a	sceptical	person	that	I	would	even	ask	things	which	nobody
seems	to	ask.	I	would	even	ask	about	the	existence	of	the	other	person,	whether
the	other	person	really	existed	or	was	I	 just	dreaming.	Because	sometimes	you
dream	and	there	are	persons	in	your	dream.
I	have	always	loved	Chuang	Tzu's	famous	statement:	'One	night	I	dreamt	that	I
became	a	butterfly,	and	since	then	I	have	always	been	in	trouble	because	I	have
not	been	able	to	figure	it	out:	if	Chuang	Tzu	can	dream	that	he	is	a	butterfly,	who
knows?	 --	 in	 the	morning	 the	butterfly	may	 fall	 asleep	and	start	dreaming	 that
she	is	a	Chuang	Tzu.	Who	knows?'
I	 had	 it	 written	 just	 behind	 my	 desk	 when	 I	 was	 the	 university.	 One	 of	 my
professors	 came	 to	 see	me	 one	 day.	 He	 saw	 that	 and	 he	 said	 'Why	 have	 you
written	 this	 Chuang	 Tzu	 statement?'	 I	 said	 'This	 is	 my	 statement	 too.	 I	 don't
believe	that	you	are.'
He	 said	 'What	 are	 you	 saying?'	 I	 said	 'Because	 sometimes	 you	 come	 in	 the
dreams	also.	And	now	the	thing	has	become	more	complicated.'	He	said	 'What
do	you	mean?'	I	said	'In	the	dream	also	you	asked	about	this	board,	"Why	do	you
have	this	board?"	--	and	now	you	are	asking	again.	Now	which	one	to	believe?'
He	 simply	 went	 out.	 He	 said	 'You	 will	 drive	 me	 crazy!	 Are	 you	 mad	 or
something?'
But	I	am	happy	that	I	was	 that	mad.	Because	I	could	not	believe	 in	anything	I
was	 free,	 totally	 free,	 and	 in	 that	 freedom	 something	 transpired;	 in	 that	 utter
emptiness	something	came	from	the	beyond	like	a	breeze.
I	could	not	see	it	but	I	felt	it;	I	felt	the	freshness	of	it,	I	felt	the	fragrance	of	it	and
it	transformed	me.	I	am	still	not	a	believer	because	now	god	is	a	certainty	to	me.
Now	I	don't	say	God	exists,	'I	say	'ONLY	god	exists	and	nothing	else.'
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#29
Chapter	title:	None
29	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007285
ShortTitle:	GWIND29
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
What	is	the	meaning	of	your	name?	--	I	don't	know.	--	That's	good.	I	don't	know
either!	--	This	will	be	your	name:	Ma	Anand	Waveney.	Anand	means	bliss	--	that
much	I	know!	And	that's	all	that	is	worth	knowing.
Seek	bliss	and	all	else	will	 follow.	Whatsoever	Waveney	means	doesn't	matter,
but	 remember	 that	 religion	 is	basically	a	search	for	bliss,	not	a	search	for	god,
not	a	search	for	truth.
Once	 bliss	 happens,	 once	 you	 are	 totally	 blissful	 you	 become	 aware	 of	many
things	you	were	not	aware	of	before.	You	become	aware	of	 truth,	you	become
aware	 of	 beauty,	 you	 become	 aware	 of	 a	 music	 that	 permeates	 the	 whole	 of
existence.	 In	 fact	 that	 music	 is	 called	 god.	 Hence	 the	 Bible	 starts	 'In	 the
beginning	 there	 was	 the	 word.'	 That	 word	 is	 not	 the	 right	 translation	 of	 the
original.	In	the	beginning	there	was	music,	sound,	celestial	sound.	And	god	was
with	the	word	and	god	was	the	word.
Now	 'word'	 seems	 to	 be	 absolutely	 irrelevant.	 The	 word	 cannot	 be	 in	 the
beginning	 because	 word	 needs	 meaning	 and	 meaning	 can	 be	 given	 only	 by
people.	No	word	has	 intrinsic	meaning,	all	meanings	are	given	meanings.	And
god	 certainly	 is	 not	 a	 word;	 the	 word	 'god'	 is	 not	 god.	 But	 god	 is	 music,
harmony,	rhythm.
So	if	I	were	to	translate	the	Bible	from	the	original	I	would	say	'In	the	beginning
there	was	music,	great	harmony.	And	god	was	with	that	music	and	god	was	that
music.'
We	can	hear	it	again	because	it	is	something	eternal.	It	was	in	the	beginning,	it	is
in	 the	middle,	 it	will	be	 in	 the	end	--	 it	will	always	be.	All	 that	we	need	is	 the
right	approach,	the	right	state	of	receptivity.	That's	what	bliss	creates	in	you.
A	 miserable	 person	 becomes	 closed.	 And	 that	 is	 our	 usual	 observation,
everybody	knows	it:	when	you	are	miserable	you	are	closed,	all	communication
is	lost,	all	communion	is	lost.	And	when	you	are	blissful	you	want	to	relate,	you
want	to	commune,	you	are	open,	you	are	available,	you	are	vulnerable.
Hence	 to	 me	 religion	 is	 basically	 a	 search	 for	 bliss	 and	 then	 everything	 else
follows.	Jesus	uses	a	different	terminology	but	he	means	exactly	the	same	thing.
He	says	'First	seek	ye	the	kingdom	of	god,	then	all	else	shall	be	added	unto	you.'
By	the	phrase	'kingdom	of	god'	he	means	exactly	what	I	mean	by	bliss.
Bliss	is	the	kingdom	of	god,	and	to	find	it	is	all	that	is	needed,	then	everything
else	simply	follows	of	its	own	accord.
We	know	a	love	that	is	momentary.	One	day	it	is	there,	another	day	it	is	gone.	Its
very	 momentariness	 shows	 that	 it	 is	 not	 real	 love,	 it	 is	 something	 else
masquerading	as	 love	--	maybe	 lust,	 some	biological	urge,	some	psychological
need,	 the	 fear	 of	 being	 alone,	 an	 effort	 to	 remain	 occupied	with	 the	 other,	 an
endeavour	to	fill	one's	emptiness	in	some	way	or	other.	It	can	be	a	thousand	and
one	other	things	but	it	is	not	love.	If	it	is	love...	the	most	essential	quality	of	love
is	its	everlastingness.
Once	 you	 have	 tasted	 the	 eternity	 of	 love,	 the	 timelessness	 of	 love,	 you	 are
transformed.	Then	you	are	no	more	part	of	 the	mundane	world;	you	enter	 into
the	 world	 of	 the	 holy,	 the	 sacred.	 Of	 course	 you	 go	 on	 living	 in	 the	 same
ordinary	way,	in	fact	you	become	more	ordinary	than	you	ever	were	before.	You
lose	all	pretensions,	all	egoistic	trips.	You	forget	all	about	your	being	somebody,
you	become	utterly	ordinary.	But	in	that	ordinariness	there	is	a	glow,	a	grace,	a
beauty,	a	great	splendour.	You	are	full	of	light	because	you	are	full	of	love,	you
are	 full	 of	 joy	 because	 you	 are	 full	 of	 love.	 You	 are	 always	 ready	 to	 share
because	you	have	stumbled	upon	an	inexhaustible	source.	You	cannot	be	miserly
any	more.
The	love	I	am	talking	about	has	nothing	to	do	with	our	so-called	relationships.
Our	 relationships	 are	 arbitrary.	 The	 love	 which	 is	 eternal	 relates	 but	 it	 never
creates	relationships.	It	relates	--	it	relate-q	to	trees,	to	the	sun,	to	the	moon,	to
the	wind,	 to	people,	 to	 the	animals,	 to	 the	earth,	 to	 the	 rocks	 --	 it	 is	 a	 twenty-
four-hour-a-day	relating,	but	it	does	not	create	any	relationship.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Relating	is	like	a	rivers	it	is	a	flow,	it	is	a	movement,	it	is	dynamic,	alive,	it	is	a
dance.	 Relationship	 is	 something	 stagnant,	 something	 that	 has	 gone	 stale,
something	that	has	stopped	growing,	something	stunted.
And	whenever	 there	 is	something	which	has	stopped	growing	you	start	 feeling
bored,	you	start	feeling	sad.
A	 despair	 surrounds	 you	 and	 a	 great	 anguish	 arises	 in	 you	 because	 you	 start
losing	contact	with	life.
Life	 is	 always	 riverlike	 and	 now	 you	 are	 tethered	 to	 something	 --	 a	 wife,	 a
husband,	a	friend.	Whenever	one	is	tethered	one	becomes	angry	because	nobody
wants	to	lose	his	freedom.	Man's	greatest	joy	is	in	being	free.	And	the	stupidity
of	 the	 human	mind	 ;s	 such	 that	 it	 goes	 on	 continuously	 creating	 situations	 in
which	that	freedom	is	lost	again	and	again.	Then	you	are	like	a	bird	whose	wings
have	been	cut:	you	look	like	a	bird	but	your	soul	suffers	because	you	cannot	fly	-
-	and	what	is	a	bird	which	cannot	fly?	And	what	is	a	being	who	is	not	in	a	flow,
who	is	not	growing?
Being	 is	alive	when	 it	 is	becoming.	Being	 is	becoming.	 If	you	stop	becoming,
your	being	becomes	like	a	dead	rock,	and	if	you	go	on	moving	then	you	are	like
a	lotus	which	goes	on	opening.
My	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 know	 the	 great	 difference	 between	 relating	 and
relationship.	And	it	is	not	only	about	love	that	I	am	talking,	it	has	to	be	your	very
style	 of	 life.	Never,	 never	 for	 a	 single	moment	 lose	 your	 freedom.	And	 never
destroy	 anybody	 else's	 freedom.	 That's	 what	 religion	 means	 to	 me.	 A	 really
religious	person	remains	free	and	helps	the	people	who	come	in	contact	with	him
to	be	free.	He	never	possesses	anybody	and	he	never	allows	anybody	to	possess
him.
It	 needs	 constant	 vigilance	 because	 our	 minds	 always	 want	 to	 cling	 and	 in
clinging	we	 lose.	 In	clinging	we	start	 committing	 suicide.	Then	a	very	 strange
situation	arises:	we	hate	the	person	we	love,	we	want	to	destroy	the	person	we
cling	 to.	A	very	 strange	 situation,	but	 if	you	understand	 it,	 it	 is	perfectly	 clear
and	 logical.	You	hate	 the	 person	because	 he	 has	 destroyed	your	 freedom.	You
hate	the	situation	because	you	are	imprisoned	in	it,	you	are	a	prisoner.	And	you
are	a	clinger	because	 the	known,	 the	 familiar,	gives	you	a	certain	comfort	 and
you	are	afraid	of	the	unknown,	the	beyond.
So	you	go	on	doing	something	which	is	self-contradictory:	on	the	one	hand	you
cling,	on	the	other	hand	you	want	freedom.	And	that	is	what	all	the	people	of	the
world	are	struggling	with.	They	cling	to	the	very	cage	of	which	they	want	to	be
free	 and	 their	 whole	 life	 remains	 just	 a	 futile	 exercise.	 They	 cannot	 be	 free
because	 they	 cling,	 and	 they	 cannot	 destroy	 the	 cage	 because	 then	 there	 is
nothing	else	to	cling	to.	And	they	cannot	drop	the	idea	of	being	free	because	that
is	our	intrinsic	nature.	It	is	impossible	to	drop	it;	there	is	no	way	to	do	it.
Not	a	single	human	being	has	been	able	to	do	it	up	to	now	and	nobody	is	ever
going	to	succeed	in	doing	it,	because	it	 is	not	that	we	love	freedom,	in	fact	we
are	freedom	and	only	in	freedom	can	we	grow.
So	this	is	true	about	love,	this	is	true	about	everything	else	in	your	life	too.
My	 suggestion	 to	 all	 of	 my	 sannyasins	 is	 don't	 trust	 in	 nouns,	 trust	 in	 verbs.
Become	a	verb	rather	than	becoming	a	noun.	Rather	than	love,	think	of	loving.
Rather	 than	 being,	 think	 of	 becoming.	 Rather	 than	 of	 a	 flower,	 think	 of
flowering.	Always	think	in	terms	of	verbs	and	you	will	never	be	frustrated.	Your
life	will	 become	 a	 constant	 growth	 from	 one	 peak	 to	 another	 peak,	 and	 those
peaks	go	on	becoming	higher	and	higher.
The	 search	 for	 god,	 truth,	 bliss,	 or	 whatsoever	 one	 likes	 to	 call	 it,	 is	 really	 a
search	for	a	union	with	the	whole.
We	are	brought	up	by	every	society,	civilisation,	religion,	in	such	a	way	that	we
are	given	a	false	identity.	We	are	all	deceived	and	cheated.	And	the	people	who
cheat	 us	 are	 very	 powerful;	 in	 fact	 their	 power	 depends	 on	 cheating	 and	 they
have	been	cheating	for	centuries.	They	have	accumulated	great	power
--	the	politicians,	the	priests	--	and	they	are	afraid	of	allowing	anybody	to	know
the	truth.	Their	whole	business	depends	on	people	who	are	gullible,	ready	to	be
deceived,	very	willing	to	be	deceived,	in	fact	asking	to	be	deceived,	hankering	to
be	deceived.
From	the	very	childhood	they	create	such	situations	that	slowly	slowly	the	child
becomes	aware	that	if	he	wants	to	survive	in	the	world	he	has	to	compromise.	It
is	not	very	consciously	--	you	can't	expect	that	much	consciousness	from	a	child,
even	old	people	are	not	so	conscious	--	but	a	vague	awareness	starts	growing	in
the	child	 that	 'If	 I	am	going	 to	be	 true	I	will	be	 in	constant	 trouble.'	 If	he	says
anything	true	he	is	immediately	punished.
My	father	used	to	ask	me	when	I	was	a	child	'Have	you	done	this?'	And	I	would
always	answer	him	with	another	question.	And	he	said	 'What	is	 this	nonsense?
You	always	answer	me	by	another	question.'	I	said	 'I	want	to	be	perfectly	clear
about	 it.	Am	I	going	 to	be	punished	 if	 I	say	 the	 truth?	About	 this	 I	want	 to	be
very	clear.	If	I	am	going	to	be	punished	by	being	truthful	I	need	not	be	truthful;
there	is	no	proof,	there	is	no	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
evidence.	 I	 can	 lie	 and	 I	 can	 lie	 perfectly!	 So	 you	 can	 choose:	 If	 you	want	 a
beautiful,	nice	lie,	I	am	ready	to	lie.	And	I	challenge	you:	you	will	not	be	able	to
find	out	that	I	lied.	Or	if	you	want	the	truth	then	you	have	to	be	in	control	a	little,
then	 you	 cannot	 punish	 me.	 So	 choose:	 if	 you	 love	 truth	 I	 am	 ready	 to	 say
exactly	whatsoever	it	is,	as	naked	as	possible.'
He	would	ponder	over	it:	'What	to	do	with	this	boy?'	'It	is	clear-cut,'	I	said	'It	is
so	clear	--	 I	am	ready	to	do	anything	that	 is	going	to	make	you	happy.	If	 truth
makes	you	happy	then	you	have	to	be	a	little	more	alert.	You	cannot	misbehave
with	me,	because	you	have	chosen	 it.	Otherwise	I	need	not	say	 the	 truth.	 I	am
not	hiding	anything;	I	am	simply	making	my	situation	clear,	that	I	have	become
aware	of	this	fact	that	it	is	going	to	be	a	constant	problem.	So	it	is	better	to	be
clear	from	the	very	beginning.
So	 one	 day	 he	 said	 'Okay.	 I	 want	 the	 truth,'	 and	 I	 told	 him	 the	 truth	 and	 he
became	so	angry	that	I	said
'Just	be	watchful!	 I	 am	not	going	 to	 tolerate	 this	anger.	This	 is	your	 choice.	 If
you	want	to	be	angry	you	can	close	the	room	and	you	can	be	angry	at	yourself
for	 choosing	 a	 wrong	 thing.	 f	 d	 that	 was	 last	 thing,	 he	 stopped	 asking	 me,
because	this	was	the	first	thing	to	be	decided	every	time.
This	 is	 the	 situation	 of	 every	 child.	 Every	 child	 comes	 to	 a	 point	many	 times
almost	every	day	when	he	has	to	decide	that	if	he	wants	to	survive	he	has	to	lie,
he	 has	 to	 compromise,	 he	 has	 to	 adjust;	 if	 he	 says	 the	 truth	 then	 he	 is
unnecessarily	 getting	 into	 trouble.	 And	 the	 people	 who	 surround	 him	 are
powerful;	 they	 can	 torture	 him,	 they	 can	 make	 him	 suffer.	 And	 almost	 every
child	choose	survival	because	that	is	a	very	fundamental	need	of	life,	to	survive.
By	the	time	you	are	strong	enough	to	be	truthful	you	have	lost	all	sense	of	truth.
Your	lies	have	gone	so	deep	in	you,	they	have	become	so	unconscious,	they	have
become	part	and	parcel	of	your	blood,	bones	and	marrow,	that	it	becomes	next	to
impossible	to	get	rid	of	them.
That's	the	whole	process	of	being	a	sannyasin:	what	the	society	has	done	to	you-
has	to	be	undone.	You	have	to	be	reborn,	actually	reborn;	you	have	to	be	a	child
again,	you	have	to	start	learning	things	from	ABC,	only	then	will	you	be	aware
that	the	ego	is	a	false	entity	imposed	on	you,	that	you	are	not	a	separate	unit	at
all,	that	you	are	part	of	the	organic	whole.
And	 to	know	 it	brings	great	 rejoicing,	because	when	you	are	not	as	a	 separate
entity,	how	can	anxiety	exist,	how	can	anguish	exist?	Then	life	becomes	a	sheer
celebration.	Then	there	is	freedom	without	any	fear.
Bliss	 is	 equivalent	 to	 god.	 'God'	 is	 a	 beautiful	 word	 but	 it	 has	 become	 ugly
because	 of	 wrong	 associations.	 It	 has	 fallen	 into	 wrong	 company.	 The	 priests
have	 exploited	 it	 so	 much	 that	 I	 appreciate	 very	 much	 Friedrich	 Nietzsche's
declaration	that	god	is	dead	and	man	is	free.	In	fact	he	is	saying	the	god	of	the
priests	is	dead	because	he	only	knew	about	the	god	of	the	priests.	He	had	no	idea
about	the	god	of	the	buddhas	because	the	god	of	the	Buddhas	has	nothing	to	do
with	any	super-human	person;	it	is	a	state	of	bliss.	One	need	not	believe	in	god	at
all.
Buddha	himself	never	believed	in	any	god,	he	was	as	atheistic	as	one	can	be,	and
yet	there	has	never	been	such	a	holy	man	on	earth	as	he	was:	so	godless	and	so
godlike.	His	godlikeness	is	superb,	unique.
Nobody	even	comes	close	to	him.
Jesus	 is	 beautiful,	 Zarathustra	 is	 beautiful,	 Mahavira	 is	 beautiful,	 Lao	 Tzu	 is
beautiful,	Moses	 is	beautiful,	but	Buddha	has	 some	 tremendous	beauty	around
him,	 some	 inexplicable	 grace,	 something	 very	 much	 of	 the	 beyond.	 And	 it
became	possible	only	because	he	never	believed	 in	 the	 stupid	 idea	of	god.	He
went	 directly	 into	 the	 search,	 into	 the	 enquiry	 of	 the	 existence	 of	 bliss.	 And
because	 he	 became	 blissful	 he	 became	 divine.	 He	 knew	 that	 god	 is,	 not	 as	 a
person	but	as	a	quality.
It	 is	 as	when	 the	 sun	 rises	 --	 the	 same	quality.	 It	 is	 as	when	 the	 cuckoo	 starts
calling	from	the	distance	--
the	same	quality.	It	is	there	in	a	rose	flower.	It	is	in	the	eyes	of	two	lovers.	It	is
there	when	a	dancer	loses	himself	in	the	dance,	when	the	dancer	disappears	and
only	the	dance	remains.
Once	 you	 have	 experienced	 it	 you	 will	 find	 it	 everywhere.	 You	 will	 stumble
upon	god	from	all	sides.
Wherever	you	will	go	you	will	encounter	him.	It	is	impossible	then	to	avoid	him.
Since	I	have	known	him	I	have	not	been	able	to	avoid	him	for	a	single	moment.
Even	 if	 you	 are	 alone	 in	 your	 room	 he	 is	 inside	 you.	 He	 does	 not	 leave	 you
alone:	even	if	you	go	to	the	bathroom	he	is	there'	Even	if	you	are	asleep	in	your
bed	he	is	sleeping	with	you.	Once	you	have	known,	he	is	always	there,	in	your
very	breathing,	in	your	very	heartbeat.
But	 seek	 him	 through	 bliss,	 otherwise	 there	 is	 a	 danger	 of	 becoming	 just	 a
Christian	or	a	Hindu	or	a	Mohammedan.	And	I	want	my	sannyasins	to	be	aware
of	all	those	pitfalls.
There	is	only	one	way	to	find	truth	and	that	is	through	bliss.	A	miserable	person
cannot	find	truth.	He	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
can	theorise	about	truth,	he	can	think	about	truth,	he	may	create	great	systems	of
philosopher.	But	all	those	are	just	sandcastles	or	palaces	made	of	playing	cards:
just	a	small	breeze	and	the	whole	palace	collapses.
All	 great	 systems	 of	 philosophy	 have	 no	 foundations	 because	 the	 person	who
created	them	had	no	experience	of	truth.	Aristotle,	Kant,	Hegel,	Vico,	Feverbalh,
Marx,	 Nietzsche,	 Freud,	 Bertrand	 Russell	 --	 all	 these	 people	 have	 created
beautiful	 theories,	 but	 they	 are	 all	 words;	 they	 are	 not	 sustained	 by	 any
experience..
There	 have	 existed	 two	 rivers	 of	 consciousness:	 One	 is	 of	 the	 philosophers
Aristotle	 in	 the	West	 is	 the	 father	 of	 that,	 the	 originator.	 The	 other	 is	 of	 the
mystics.	 That	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 river.	 It	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
philosophising,	 it	 is	 rooted	 in	 existential	 experience.	And	 it	 has	 almost	 always
happened	 that	whenever	 there	was	a	great	mystic	his	 followers	always	became
divided	between	these	currents.
The	 real	 ones,	 those	 who	 have	 understood	 the	 master,	 those	 who	 have	 really
loved	 the	 master,	 became	 mystics.	 And	 those	 who	 have	 understood	 only	 the
words	 of	 the	 master	 have	 become	 very	 knowledgeable;	 they	 became	 the
philosophers.
Socrates	 was	 a	 mystic.	 Plato	 was	 his	 disciple	 but	 he	 lost	 track;	 he	 became	 a
philosopher.	Aristotle	was	Plato's	disciple.
When	 Buddha	 died	 thirty-six	 systems	 of	 philosophy	 were	 born	 amongst	 his
followers	--	thirty-six!
Almost	all	kinds	of	possibilities	are	exhausted	by	those	thirty-six	systems.	In	fact
there	 cannot	 be	 more	 than	 thirty-six	 systems.	 That	 is	 all	 the	 possible
combinations,	the	whole	world	of	philosophy	exploded.
And	the	real	people...	Mahakashyapa,	one	of	Buddha's	most	authentic	disciples,
remained	silent,	he	didn't	say	anything.	He	started	a	totally	different	tradition,	the
tradition	 of	 the	mystics.	He	 transmitted	 his	 experience	 not	 through	words,	 not
through	 scriptures,	 but	 through	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 communion:	 the
communion	of	the	master	and	the	disciple.
It	is	through	Mahakashyapa	that	the	tradition	of	Zen	was	born.	He	was	the	first,
and	very	great	mystics	 followed.	But	 it	 is	a	 totally	different	world:	 there	 is	no
argument	 about	 god,	 no	 argument	 about	 truth,	 no	 argument	 at	 all.	 mere,
argumentation	is	not	the	way	but	meditation,	not	mind	but	meditation.
These	 people	 became	 more	 and	 more	 silent.	 And	 as	 you	 become	 silent	 your
inner	source	of	blissfulness	start	exploding.	It	is	the	words	and	theories	and	the
philosophies	which	function	 like	rocks	and	don't	allow	your	springs	of	bliss	 to
flow.
So	from	this	very	first	moment	remember	it,	that	my	way	is	the	way	of	a	mystic,
not	of	a	philosopher.	 I	believe	 in	bliss,	not	 in	 theories	about	bliss.	And	 I	want
you	to	 taste	 it,	not	 just	 to	 think	about	 it.	 It	 is	pointless	 to	go	on	thinking	about
food	--	it	won't	nourish	you.	It	is	stupid	to	go	on	thinking	about	water.	Why?	--
when	the	river	is	flowing?	You	can	drink	and	you	can	quench	your	thirst	and	you
can	swim	in	the	river	and	you	can	become	the	river	and	go	to	the	sea.
There	 are	 foolish	 people	who	 are	 standing	or	 sitting	 on	 the	 bank	 and	 thinking
about	water,	theorising	about	water,	finding	what	water	consists	of	and	dying	of
thirst'
So	don't	be	a	thinker,	don't	be	a	philosopher,	be	a	mystic.	My	sannyasins	have	to
be	mystics,	existential	experiencers.	It	is	a	part	of	realisation.
Mind	 is	misery.	 If	 one	wants	 to	be	blissful	 in	 the	mind	 there	 is	 no	possibility.
Mind	is	a	dis-ease,	exactly	a	disease,	a	restlessness.	But	one	can	transcend	mind,
one	need	not	remain	in	it,	one	can	jump	out	of	it.	It	is	our	decision	whether	to	be
in	it	or	not.
The	whole	phenomenon	of	religion	depends	on	this	possibility,	that	man	can	take
a	jump	out	of	the	mind.	And	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about:	the	art	of	getting
out	 of	 the	mind.	And	 it	 is	 not	 difficult	 at	 all,	 it	 is	 very	 simple.	 Just	watch	 the
mind,	with	no	judgement.	Don't	be	a	judge,	just	be	a	witness,	mirrorlike.
The	mirror	does	not	 say	 'How	beautiful,	 how	ugly,	 how	disgusting,	 the	mirror
simply	reflects	and	remains	silent.	That's	the	way	of	the	meditator:	he	becomes	a
mirror,	he	 looks	at	 the	mind.	Thousands	of	 thoughts	and	desires	and	memories
go	on	passing	day	in,	day	out	--	he	goes	on	watching,	with	no	judgement	at	all.
He	does	not	say	 'This	 is	good,	 this	 is	bad,	 this	should	not	be,	 this	should	be,	 I
should	choose	--	this	is	a	gem,	what	a	beautiful	thought!	And	this	is	a	disgusting
thought,	 this	 should	not	be	allowed	 to	enter	my	mind.'	 If	you	 say	 those	 things
you	get	involved.	You	start	getting	inside	the	mind;	you	become	entangled	and
you	lose	meditation.
Meditation	simply	means	a	choiceless	awareness.	It	takes	a	little	time	because	it
is	a	knack	to	learn,	but	if	one	goes	on	trying	--	whenever	you	have	time	just	go
on	 trying.	Whenever	 you	 have	 any	 time	 close	 your	 eyes	 and	watch	 the	mind.
Enjoy	 it.	 It	 is	 far	more	 interesting	 than	going	 to	 any	movie,	 than	 sitting	 like	 a
stupid	person	before	a	TV	set.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
It	is	good	that	in	the	West	the	TV	set	is	now	being	called	the	idiot	box;	in	fact
only	idiots	sit	before	it.
The	box	is	not	so	much	of	an	idiot	as	the	people	who	Bit	before	it.	And	they	go
on	sitting...
Now	 the	 average	American	 sits	 before	 the	 idiot	 box	 five	 to	 six	hours	per	day,
glued	to	the	chair.	If	 this	goes	on	and	on	then	America	is	going	to	become	the
most	 stupid	 country	 in	 the	 world.	 They	 have	 somehow	 to	 get	 rid	 of	 this
nonsense.
And	what	do	 they	go	on	watching?	 --	 the	 same	murder	and	 the	 same	violence
and	rape	and	the	same	old	stories,	 the	same	triangles:	 two	women,	one	man	or
two	men,	one	woman.	It	is	such	a	stupidity!	Man	has	been	writing	the	same	story
again	and	again	and	there	are	fools	who	go	on	watching	them.	The	story	is	the
same,	the	plot	is	the	same,	the	strategy	is	the	same,	nothing	is	new	in	it.
It	is	far	more	interesting	to	watch	your	own	mind	because	it	is	far	more	insane
and	 far	 more	 inventive	 too.	 If	 you	 simply	 go	 on	 watching	 it	 you	 will	 be
surprised.	You	will	 find	more	 postures	 for	 love-making	 than	 any	 psychologist
has	 ever	 discovered.	 You	 will	 defeat	 all	 Masters-and-Johnsons	 and	 Kinsey
reports	and	the	old	master	Vatsyayana	and	all	his	postures	for	love	making.	Your
mind	is	perfectly	capable	of	inventing	such	absurd	postures.	And	the	mind	is	so
interesting...	You	will	do	all	kinds	of	violence	and	all	kinds	of	murders	and	you
will	commit	suicide	and	everything	will	happen	--	simply	go	on	watching.	And
the	miracle	is	you	don't	have	to	pay	for	it!
Then	slowly	slowly	this	whole	scene	starts	disappearing.	As	you	become	more
alert	 it	 starts	 disappearing,	 as	 you	 become	more	 conscious	 it	 loses	 its	 grip	 on
you.	One	day	 the	greatest	miracle	 in	 life	happens:	 the	mind	 simply	disappears
and	 there	 is	 vast	 emptiness	 and	 nothing	 to	 observe.	 You	 are	 left	 in	 absolute
solitude	--	that	is	meditation	--	and	out	of	that	solitude	thousands	of	flowers	of
bliss,	of	beauty,	of	truth,	of	god,	bloom.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#30
Chapter	title:	None
30	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007295
ShortTitle:	GWIND30
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
One	of	the	meanings	of	Myriam	is	 the	exalted.	The	moment	a	person	becomes
blissful	he	is	exalted	to	the	highest	peak	of	consciousness,	victory.	He	may	live
on	 the	earth	but	he	 is	no	more	part	of	 the	earth,	he	belongs	 to	 the	beyond.	He
may	be	still	in	the	body	but	he	is	no	more	the	body;	he	is	a	Buddha,	he	is	pure
awareness.	 Now	 he	 knows	 his	 immortality,	 now	 he	 knows	 that	 he	 was	 never
born	 and	will	 never	 die;	 bodies	 come	and	go,	 but	 the	 innermost	 core	 remains,
abides.	Knowing	this	all	fear	disappears,	all	anxiety	drops	away,	all	anguish,	all
despair	withers	away.	For	the	first	time	you	start	experiencing	life	at	its	highest
crescendo.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 you	 blossom,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 Spring	 is
experienced.	That	is	the	goal	of	sannyas.
And	 the	 second	 meaning	 is	 also	 beautiful;	 the	 second	 meaning	 is	 living
fragrance.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Man	is	born	as	a	seed	and	unfortunately	millions	die	as	seeds.	They	never	find
the	 right	 soil,	 they	 never	 make	 any	 effort	 to	 find	 a	 gardener.	 They	 take
themselves	 for	 granted.	They	 think	 that	whatsoever	 they	 are,	 this	 is	 the	 end	 --
and	this	is	not	the	end,	this	is	only	the	beginning.	And	to	think	of	the	beginning
as	the	end	is	the	utmost	stupidity.	But	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	of	people
live	in	this	idiotic	way.	They	never	search	for	their	potential,	they	never	become
explorers	of	their	inner	world.	And	there	are	infinite	possibilities.
The	seed	can	become	a	tree.	The	tree	will	have	great	foliage,	beauty,	form,	joy.	It
will	dance	 in	 the	wind,	 in	 the	rain,	 in	 the	sun.	Birds	will	sing,	birds	will	make
their	nest	 in	 it;	people	will	 rest	underneath	 its	 shade;	 flowers	will	 come,	 fruits
will	come.	And	when	a	 tree	 is	 full	of	 flowers	 there	 is	great	contentment	 in	 the
very	being	of	the	tree.	It	has	arrived,	it	has	fulfilled	its	mission.
The	same	experience	happens	 to	man	when	he	becomes	a	Buddha	or	a	Christ.
He	is	just	all	flowers	and	at	the	deepest	core	of	his	being	there	is	only	hallelujah,
there	 is	 only	 joy,	 tremendous	 bliss,	 inexhaustible	 bliss.	 He	 becomes	 a	 living
fragrance.
My	sannyasins	have	 to	become	living	fragrances.	But	 the	 journey	is	an	 inward
journey.	 The	 exploration	 is	 not	 scientific	 but	 mystic,	 it	 is	 not	 extrovert	 but
introvert.
The	Indian	word	'babu'	was	invented	by	the	Britishers.	When	they	came	to	India
their	first	capital	was	Calcutta;	Delhi	became	their	next	capital.	Only	afterwards
did	they	move	to	Delhi,	otherwise	the	first	capital	was	Calcutta.	And	Bengalis,
the	people	who	live	around	Calcutta,	oat	rice	and	fish,	and	fish	smells	badly.
bu	moans	bad	smell	and	ba	means...	'ba'	means	with	and	'bu'	means	bad	smell.
They	 had	 to	 give	 employment	 to	Bengalis	 and	 they	 invented	 the	word	 'babu'.
They	 started	 calling	 the	 Bengalis,	 babus:	 with	 bad	 smell.	 But	 because	 these
Bengalis,	 these	 babus,	 became	 important	 people	 --	 they	 became	 the	 via-media
between	 the	 Indian	 society	 and	 the	 rulers	 --	 the	 word	 'babu'	 slowly	 became
important.
It	 lost	 its	 original	 meaning.	 Now	 to	 call	 somebody	 babu	 means	 he	 is	 an
important	person.
Now	it	has	become	very	honourable.	So	whenever	somebody	has	to	be	honoured
they	call	him	'babu',	for	example,	Babu	Jayprakash	Narayan.	The	first	President
of	India	was	called	Babu	Rajendra	Prasad.
These	 people	were	 utterly	 ignorant	 of	 the	meaning,	 just	 because	 every	 parent
wants	 a	 child	 also	 to	be	very	 important	 some	day,	 parents	 started	 calling	 their
little	boys	babus,	 important	people;	hence	 it	 became	associated	with	 the	 child.
Then	babu	became	equivalent	to	a	child.
So	 I	will	give	you	 the	name:	Swami	Atit	Babu.	Atit	means	one	who	has	gone
beyond...	bad	smells'
(much	laughter).	Otherwise	everybody	stinks'.	And	my	whole	purpose	is	to	help
you	to	go	beyond	all	kinds	of	smells.
Do	 you	 know	why	 you	 are	 checked	 at	 the	 gate?	 It	 is	 a	 very	 esoteric	 thing	 --
because	your	smell	gives	indications	of	your	spiritual	growth,	of	what	centre	you
are	at.	If	your	smell	is	foul	that	means	you	are	just	at	the	lowest	centre.	As	you
start	rising	the	bad	smell	starts	changing	into	a	beautiful	fragrance.
And	it	 is	 just	a	coincidence	that	just	now	the	first	person,	Myriam	...	her	name
meant	living	fragrance.
And	suddenly	you	come	here...	(much	laughter).	But	every	mountain	is	followed
by	a	valley!
If	you	can	go	beyond	the	meaning	there	is	no	need	to	worry.
So	remember	that	one	has	to	go	beyond	all	that	stinks.	Mind	stings,	ego	stinks,
jealousy	 stinks,	 possessiveness	 stinks,	 hatred,	 anger,	 greed	 --	 these	 are	 all
stinking	things	and	if	you	cling	to	them	you	remain	stinking.	And	people	cling!
People	 cling	 to	 everything,	 whatsoever	 it	 is.	 Even	 if	 they	 are	 drowning	 in	 an
ocean	 they	 will	 cling	 to	 a	 straw	 --	 and	 they	 know	 the	 stupidity	 of	 it,	 that	 by
clinging	to	a	straw	you	cannot	be	saved.	But	man	goes	on	hoping	against	hope.
The	 idea	 is	 that	 something	 is	better	 than	nothing	 --	 and	 that	 is	 a	whole	wrong
approach.	Nothing	is	always	better	than	anything	because	nothing	means	purity,
unadulterated	 purity.	Nothing	means	 silence,	 no	 noise,	 no	mind.	Only	 nothing
can	 give	 you	 fragrance.	 It	 arises	 only	 when	 one	 has	 moved	 from	 the	 mind
towards	no-mind.	But	people	go	on	clinging	to	each	block	which	is	hampering
their	 growth.	 They	 hold	 on	 to	 it;	 they	will	 fight	 if	 you	 try	 to	 take	 away	 their
support,	 although	 it	 may	 be	 only	 supporting	 their	 misery.	 And	 whatsoever
belongs	to	them	they	become	proud	of.	Even	if	it	is	hell	they	will	be	proud	of	it
because	'It	is	my	hell.'
I	have	heard	about	a	Jewish	couple.	They	were	sitting	in	a	movie-house.	A	very
beautiful	woman	came	by	and	hugged	and	kissed	 the	man.	The	wife	was	very
angry	and	the	husband	was	at	a	loss	as	to	how	to	explain	who	she	was.	But	Jews
are	Jews	clever,	cunning,	calculating.	He	immediately	invented.	He	said
'Don't	be	disturbed.	In	our	business	life	everybody	has	to	have	a	girlfriend.	And
you	 can	 enquire	 of	 other	 people	 also	 who	 are	 in	 my	 business.	 Look	 --	 that
woman	sitting	there	is	my	partner's	girlfriend,	and	that	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
woman	on	the	other	side	is	my	ex-partner's	girlfriend.'	He	told	her	about	many	of
the	other	women	and	then	he	asked	'What	do	you	think?	Which	one	is	the	best?'
And	the	wife	says	'	ours	is	the	best.'
"Ours"	--	now	the	whole	thing	has	changed,	now	it	is	a	question	of	pride.
A	psychoanalyst	was	 going	 into	 an	 elevator	with	 a	 young	woman,	 his	 patient,
and	he	 farted	so	 loudly	and	 the	 smell	was	so	 foul	 that	 the	woman	said	 'Was	 it
you?'	And	the	man	said	'What	do	you	think?	Do	I	smell	like	that	the	whole	time?
It	is	only	once	in	a	while.'
People	 defend	 everything!	 And	 the	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 learn	 not	 to	 defend
stupidities.	He	has	 to	drop	them,	he	has	 to	go	beyond	them.	He	has	 to	become
aware	that	'Nothing	belongs	to	me,'	that	'Nothing	is	mine,'	that
'In	fact	I	don't	exist.	There	is	no	such	entity	as	I.	There	is	a	consciousness	inside
but	it	has	no	idea	of	I	at	all.'
When	you	become	silent	and	meditative	you	simply	know	you	are	but	there	is	no
notion	of	I,	not	at	all.
You	have	 an	 existential	 feeling,	 but	 there	 is	no	 ego	at	 all.	That	 is	 the	moment
when	one	transcends	all	kinds	of	stupidities	and	then	great	fragrance	is	released.
And	 that	 fragrance	 is	 not	 only	 a	 blessing	 to	 you,	 it	 becomes	 a	 blessing	 to	 the
whole	existence.
Whenever	 there	 is	 a	 man	 like	 Buddha	 or	 Jesus,	 the	 whole	 existence	 takes	 a
tremendous	 leap	 towards	 the	 heights.	 Just	 a	 single	 man	 becoming	 a	 Buddha
takes	 the	whole	 humanity	 upwards.	 People	may	 not	 be	 aware	 of	 it	 at	 all,	 but
whatsoever	humanity	is	now,	whatever	it	is	today,	it	is	only	because	of	a	dozen
people	--	not	more	than	that.
Those	dozen	people	are	the	very	salt	of	the	earth.	Remove	them	and	man	will	be
hanging	from	the	trees,	he	will	be	a	monkey	again;	all	evolution	will	disappear.
Even	Charles	Darwin	will	be	hanging	 from	 the	 trees.	 It	 is	because	of	Buddha,
Lao	Tzu,	Bahauddin,	Basho,	these	few	people,	that	humanity	has	slowly	slowly
come	 to	a	point	of	growth.	But	 it	 is	 still	 individual	effort	 that	can	make	you	a
Buddha;	it	has	not	become	a	universal	phenomenon.
Of	course,	we	are	more	fortunate,	because	the	pioneers	were	in	more	difficulty.
And	if	we	miss,	then	it	is	really	unfortunate.
My	observation	is	that	each	of	my	sannyasins	can	become	a	Buddha.	Just	a	little
effort	and	just	a	little	understanding	and	we	can	fill	the	whole	earth	with	people
aflame	with	love	and	joy,	aflame	with	godliness.
These	 two	 words,	 experience	 and	 belief,	 have	 to	 be	 very	 well	 understood.
Ordinarily	people	 think	 to	believe	 is	 religious.	 It	 is	not,	not	at	all;	 it	 is	 just	 the
opposite.	 To	 believe	 is	 to	 miss	 religion	 because	 belief	 means	 covering	 your
ignorance,	not	 transforming	your	being.	You	remain	 the	same,	you	 just	change
something	superficial.	You	start	believing	in	god	knowing	perfectly	well	that	you
don't	know.
How	can	you	deceive	yourself?	Then	you	don't	know	you	don't	know.	You	may
enforce	your	belief,	you	say	auto-hypnotise	yourself	by	 repeating	 it	 every	day,
praying	in	the	morning	and	evening	or	five	times	a	day	and	going	to	the	church
or	the	mosque	or	the	temple,	but	still,	somewhere	you	will	know	that	it	is	only	a
belief;	you	don't	know.	And	without	knowing	there	is	no	transformation.	Belief
simply	helps	people	to	deceive	themselves.	And	all	so-called	religions	are	based
in	belief.
Hence	the	world	is	full	of	religious	people	and	yet	there	seems	to	be	no	religious
flavour	 at	 all.	 These	 are	 pseudo-religious	 people	 --	 Christians,	 Hindus,
Mohammedans,	Buddhists.
Christians	 believe,	 Christ	 knew	 --	 and	 the	 difference	 is	 tremendous.	 The
Buddhists	believe,	the	Buddha	experienced.	And	you	cannot	quench	your	thirst
by	believing	in	water.	You	may	go	on	writing	'H2O,	H2O,	H2O...'	in	your	book
like	 a	mantra	 and	 you	may	 start	 doing	 transcendental	meditation,	 sitting	with
closed	eyes	and	 repeating	 'H2O,	H2O,	H2O....'	That	 is	not	going	 to	help,	your
thirst	will	remain	there.	You	need	real	water.	Whether	you	know	about	H2O	or
not	doesn't	matter:	you	need	real	living	water	to	quench	your	thirst.
You	 cannot	 go	 on	 reading	 a	 book	 on	 food	 recipes.	 For	 how	 long	 can	 you?	 It
cannot	fulfil	your	needs.
You	will	remain	hungry.	You	may	have	a	whole	library	of	books	on	food,	exotic
foods,	you	may	have	pictures	in	your	room	of	beautiful	food,	colourful.	That	too
is	not	going	to	help.	You	go	on	worshipping	those	beautiful	pictures,	but	you	will
remain	hungry	and	you	will	starve	and	you	will	die.	You	need	real	food.
And	 that	 is	 exactly	 the	 case	 with	 religion:	 you	 need	 real	 religion,	 and	 real
religion	comes	through	meditation.	Meditation	is	an	experience.
So	I	don't	say	to	you	believe	in	anything.	There	is	no	need	to	believe	in	anything
at	all.	In	fact	it	is	good	to	drop	all	beliefs	so	the	your	slate	is	clean,	so	that	your
heart	is	no	more	full	of	stupid	theories	and	ideologies,	so	that	you	are	completely
free	from	all	dogmas	and	creeds	and	able	to	enter	into	a	personal	experience	of
existence	 Meditation	 is	 a	 personal	 experience.	 Meditation	 simply	 means
becoming	silent,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
watching	your	thoughts,	because	through	watching,	thoughts	disappear.	And	the
day	 comes	 when	 there	 are	 no	 thoughts	 but	 only	 the	 watcher	 and	 nothing	 to
watch.
In	that	very	moment	the	conversion,	the	transformation,	the	revolution...	In	that
very	moment	you	become	light,	you	become	god.	That	is	our	birthright,	and	only
when	we	become	it	do	we	know	it.	Then	it	is	not	a	belief.
I	don't	believe	in	god.	I	simply	know	--	there	is	no	need	to	believe.	My	knowing
is	 not	 based	 on	 any	 arguments	 or	 proofs,	 it	 is	 simply	 based	 on	 my	 own
experience.	So	even	 if	 the	whole	world	 says	 there	 is	no	god	 it	 is	 not	going	 to
affect	me,	because	I	know.
Even	if	the	whole	world	is	blind	and	says	there	is	no	light,	a	man	who	has	seen
light	will	simply	smile.
He	will	say	 'Okay.	Go	on	believing	in	your	darkness,	but	I	know	--	what	can	I
do?	I	know	light	is	and	you	are	simply	blind.'	And	a	blind	person	can	believe	in
light	but	that	is	not	going	to	help	him	to	see.
Meditation	 gives	 you	 the	 eyes	 to	 see,	 the	 heart	 to	 feel,	 perspective,	 clarity,
understanding,	 awareness.	 It	 opens	 the	 doors	 of	 great	mysteries	 and	 treasures.
Hence	I	say	to	my	sannyasins	only	one	thing:	meditate.
Nothing	else	is	needed,	everything	else	follows	in	its	own	time.	Simply	prepare
yourself	through	meditation.
A	blissful	person	is	inevitably	good,	inevitably	virtuous,	and	a	miserable	person
is	 bound	 to	 be	 evil.	A	miserable	 person	may	 try	 to	 do	 something	good	but	 he
cannot.
You	cannot	give	 to	people	what	you	have	not	already	got	within	you;	you	can
give	only	that	which	you	have.	So	the	miserable	person	many	times	thinks	to	be
good	to	people,	he	intends	to	be	good	but	the	outcome	is	always	bad	because	he
will	 act	 out	 of	 his	 confusion,	 darkness,	 misery;	 his	 action	 will	 be	 full	 of	 his
darkness.	Notwithstanding	his	intentions	he	will	create	more	and	more	hell	in	the
world.
In	the	past	in	almost	all	societies	man	has	been	told	by	all	the	priests	'If	you	want
to	be	blissful,	be	good.'	That	is	patent	nonsense.	I	say	just	 the	opposite:	 'if	you
want	to	do	good,	be	blissful.'
If	 you	 are	 blissful	 it	 is	 impossible,	 categorically	 impossible,	 to	 harm	anybody.
Your	very	bliss	will	prevent	you.	You	will	feel	sympathy,	compassion,	love.	You
would	 like	everybody	 to	be	blissful,	because	 if	you	are	blissful	you	will	know
clearly	 that	 if	 everybody	 else	 is	 also	 blissful	 your	 bliss	 will	 be	 multiplied	 a
thousandfold.
It	 is	as	 if	you	are	clean	but	everybody	else	 is	dirty.	How	 long	can	you	 remain
clean?	 You	 are	 healthy	 but	 everybody	 else	 is	 ill.	 How	 long	 can	 you	 remain
healthy?	 You	 have	 made	 a	 beautiful	 house,	 a	 garden,	 a	 swimming	 pool,	 a
fountain,	but	the	whole	neighbourhood	is	dirty.	How	long	can	your	garden	be	in
existence?	It	cannot	survive.	We	live	in	a	world	together	with	others.
So	the	blissful	person	becomes	aware	that	it	is	good	to	help	people	to	be	blissful.
It	is	not	only	altruistic,	it	is	selfish	too,	because	he	knows	'If	more	people	around
me	are	blissful,	then	my	bliss	will	be	multiplied,	naturally.'
Remember	the	mathematics	of	bliss	...	and	the	same	is	true	about	misery:	when
you	put	two	miserable	persons	together	their	miseries	are	not	doubled,	they	are
multiplied.	Hence	every	Buddha	has	tried	to	create	a	sangha,	a	commune,	where
thousands	 of	 blissful	 people	 can	 be	 together.	 Then	 everyone's	 bliss	 will	 be	 a
millionfold,	it	will	become	almost	immeasurable.
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 fundamentals	 of	 my	 sannyas:	 be	 blissful	 and	 you	 will	 be
virtuous.	 Forget	 all	 about	 virtue,	 character,	 morality.	 They	 will	 all	 come	with
your	blissfulness,	they	are	bound	to	follow	like	shadows	following	you.
Love	is	the	highest	form	of	poetry	--	and	by	poetry	I	don't	mean	anything	literal.
To	me	poetry	is	far	more	than	just	composing	poems.	Poems	can	be	composed
even	 by	 someone	 who	 has	 no	 poetic	 life,	 who	 has	 no	 poetic	 grace.	 He	 can
compose	poems	because	to	compose	poems	you	only	need	a	certain	technique.
He	will	be	a	technician,	not	a	poet;	and	out	of	one	hundred	poets	ninety-nine	are
technicians.	And	the	same	is	true	about	every	art:	out	of	one	hundred	musicians
there	 is	 only	 one	 who	 is	 a	 musician,	 ninety-nine	 are	 technicians.	 Out	 of	 one
hundred	scientists	 there	 is	only	one	who	 is	a	 real	 scientist,	ninety-nine	are	 just
technicians.	 And	 it	 is	 so	 about	 sculpture,	 painting,	 architecture,	 about	 every
dimension	The	real	poet	has	of	necessity	to	compose	poetry	--	he	may,	he	may
not.	A	real	painter	may	paint,	may	not	paint,	but	his	life	will	be	very	colourful,
his	 life	will	 have	 a	 proportion,	 a	 symmetry,	 a	 balance.	He	 himself	will	 be	 his
painting,	he	himself	will	be	his	poetry,	he	himself	will	be	his	sculpture.
That's	why	I	mean	when	I	say	 love	 is	poetry.	 it	gives	you	a	new	dimension;	 it
makes	you	more	aesthetic.
It	 makes	 you	 aware	 of	 many	 things	 of	 which	 you	 were	 not	 aware	 before.	 It
makes	you	aware	of	the	stars	and	the	flowers	and	the	green	and	the	red	and	the
gold	of	the	trees.	It	makes	you	aware	of	people,	their	eyes,	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
their	 faces,	 their	 lives.	Each	person	 is	 a	 tremendous	phenomenon	with	 infinite
possibilities.	Each	 person	 is	 an	 incredible	 story,	 each	 person	 is	 a	 living	 novel.
Each	person	is	a	world	unto	himself.
If	 you	 have	 the	 eyes	 to	 see	 you	will	 be	 surprised,	 even	 a	 beggar	 is	 not	 just	 a
beggar,	he	is	also	a	human	being.	He	has	experienced	love,	he	has	experienced
anger,	he	has	experienced	a	thousand	and	one	things	which	even	emperors	may
be	jealous	of.	His	life	is	worth	reading,	worth	observation,	worth	understanding,
because	 his	 life	 is	 also	 a	 possibility	 of	 your	 life.	 Each	 person	 is	 living	 a
possibility,	 transforming	 a	 single	 possibility	 into	 actuality.	 And	 all	 those
possibilities	are	yours	 too.	You	can	be	an	Adolf	Hitler	and	you	can	be	a	 Jesus
Christ	--	both	doors	are	open.	One	has	entered	through	one	door,	 the	other	has
entered	from	another	door;	both	doors	are	open	for	you.	Hence	I	have	been	as
interested	 in	Gautam	Buddha	 as	 I	 have	been	 interested	 in	Adolf	Hitler.	 I	 have
been	 interested	 in	 Jesus	 but	 I	 have	 always	 been	 as	 interested	 in	 Judas	 too,
because	each	human	being	is	also	my	possibility.
One	has	to	understand	this,	then	the	whole	universe	becomes	a	university.	That's
exactly	the	meaning	of	university;	it	comes	from	the	same	word	'universe'.	Then
all	 situations	 become	 learning	 situations	 and	 all	 challenges	 become	 growth
challenges.	And	it	is	slowly	slowly	that	one	creates	oneself.
We	are	born	only	as	opportunities,	then	everything	depends	on	us,	what	we	are
going	to	become,	what	the	end	result	of	it	all	is	going	to	be.
By	 being	 a	 sannyasin	 you	 are	 choosing	 a	 certain	 possibility	 against	 other
possibilities.	You	are	choosing	to	become	a	Buddha,	a	Christ,	a	Lao	Tzu.	You	are
moving	 in	 the	most	exalted	dimension;	everything	else	 is	superficial	compared
to	this	dimension,	mundane.	This	dimension	is	sacred.
The	Golden	Wind
Chapter	#31
Chapter	title:	None
31	July	1980	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium
Archive	code:	8007305
ShortTitle:	GWIND31
Audio:
No
Video:
No
[NOTE:	 This	 is	 an	 unedited	 tape	 transcript	 of	 an	 unpublished	 darshan	 diary,
which	has	been	scanned	and	cleaned	up.	It	is	for	reference	purposes	only.]
The	old	idea	of	nobleness	is	based	in	a	very	false	notion:	it	is	rooted	in	birth,	as
if	a	person	is	born	noble.
Nobody	is	born	noble;	nobility	is	something	which	one	has	to	learn.	It	is	an	art,	it
has	nothing	to	do	with	birth.
You	can	grow	to	be	noble,	you	can	die	in	a	noble	way,	you	can	live	in	a	noble
way,	 but	 birth	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 the	 same	 for	 all;	 nobody	 is	 noble,	 nobody	 is
ignoble.	Birth	is	only	an	opportunity	to	grow,	then	everything	depends	on	you.
And	because	the	idea	has	persisted	for	centuries	that	a	person	is	noble	by	birth
very	few	people	have	ever	tried	to	practise	nobility	as	an	art.	What	can	you	do
about	 your	 birth?	 --	 somebody	 is	 born	 as	 an	 aristocrat,	 and	 somebody	 is	 not.
Now	nothing	can	be	done	about	it,	it	has	already	happened.	You	don't	have	any
choice	any	more,	the	chapter	is	closed.	But	that	is	absolutely	wrong.
Aristocrats	 all	 over	 the	 world	 have	 disappeared,	 are	 disappearing,	 kings	 have
disappeared,	queens	have	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
disappeared,	 or	 if	 they	 have	 not	 disappeared	 they	 are	 on	 the	way!	 In	 the	 end
there	will	 be	 only	 five	 kings:	 four	 of	 playing	 cards	 and	 one	 of	 England.	And
those	four	of	playing	cards	are	far	more	powerful!
But	the	idea	of	nobleness	continues,	the	old	idea	is	like	a	hangover.	We	have	to
drop	 it	because	by	dropping	 it	a	 tremendous	openness	happens.	Then	you	start
looking	 for	 ways	 and	 means	 to	 grow	 noble.	 And	 nobleness	 is	 something
beautiful	--	it	is	a	flowering,	it	is	fragrance.
When	your	life	is	full	of	light	and	love,	awareness	and	truth,	compassion	and	a
sense	 of	 godliness,	 then	 you	 are	 noble.	 All	 these	 things	 happen	 through
meditation.	Meditation	makes	you	aware	of	all	that	is	potential	in	you	and	also
gives	you	keys	 to	materialise	 it,	 to	 realise	 it.	 It	 is	 the	greatest	 art	 and	 it	 is	 the
greatest	science	because	it	creates	human	splendour.
Love	is	the	first	experience	which	gives	you	a	glimpse	of	the	vastness	of	life,	of
its	unboundedness,	of	its	oceanicness.	Without	love	a	man	remains	confined	in	a
very	small	capsule,	like	a	dark	prison	cell	--
without	even	a	window	to	look	at	the	stars,	at	the	sun,	at	the	moon.
A	man	without	love	is	a	man	yet	unborn,	he	is	still	 in	the	womb.	In	the	womb
there	 is	 no	 sun,	 no	 moon,	 no	 stars,	 no	 wind,	 no	 rain.	 You	 are	 closed	 from
everywhere.	The	womb	 is	 like	a	grave,	 and	 it	 is	not	accidental	 that	 it	 is	 like	a
grave.
Life	is	a	circle.	It	begins	in	the	grave,	it	ends	in	the	grave	--	that's	how	the	circle
becomes	complete.	And	there	are	very	few	fortunate	people	who	really	try	to	get
out	of	the	womb.	Even	though	they	are	physically	born,	they	remain	surrounded
by	 subtle	 walls,	 boundaries.	 Somebody	 is	 a	 Christian,	 somebody	 is	 a	 Hindu,
somebody	is	a	Mohammedan	--	these	are	wombs.
There	is	no	need	to	be	confined.	Christ	is	beautiful,	so	is	Buddha,	so	is	Krishna,
so	is	Zarathustra	--	why	be	confined	to	Christ	or	Krishna?	Why	be	confined	at
all?	Why	not	claim	the	whole	heritage	of	humanity?
Why	 not	 become	 oceanic?	 When	 one	 can	 absorb	 Krishna	 and	 Christ	 both,
Mohammed	and	Mahavira	both,	Lao	Tzu	and	Zarathustra	both,	then	why	choose,
why	choose	at	all?	 --	because	 they	all	bring	 tremendous	 richness	 to	you.	They
are	 like	 beautiful	 rivers	 falling	 in	 the	 ocean	 bringing	 different	 chemicals,
different	colours,	different	fragrances,	different	experiences,	different	worlds.	A
man	should	be	like	an	ocean,	absorbing	everything.
Why	be	Indian,	Chinese,	German,	Italian.	Why?	--	there	is	no	need.	Why	create
these	 small	boundaries	around	yourself?	But	everybody	goes	on	creating	more
and	more	boundaries	and	then	people	suffer	and	they	say	they	feel	bored	and	life
has	 no	 meaning:	 'Why	 are	 we	 here?	What	 is	 the	 purpose	 of	 it	 all?	 All	 these
questions	 arise	 because	 of	 a	 basic	 stupidity.	 If	 you	 drop	 all	 the	 boundaries	 all
these	 questions	 disappear	 because	 then	 life	 is	 so	 beautiful,	 so	 blissful	 ;	 one
cannot	ask	what	the	purpose	of	it	is.
This	 is	 something	 to	 be	 understood:	 you	 ask	 the	 purpose	 of	 life	 only	 when
something	is	wrong,	otherwise	you	don't	ask.	If	you	are	living	in	a	beautiful	love
relationship	you	don't	ask	'What	is	the	purpose	of	life?	--	you	know!	If	you	are
flying	high	in	your	life,	if	you	are	not	feeling	frustrated,	you	don't	ask	'What	is
the	purpose	of	life?	'	You	know.
When	you	are	happy	you	never	ask	the	purpose.	It	is	only	the	unhappy	people,
the	miserable	 people,	who	 ask	 these	 questions.	And	 they	 cannot	 be	 answered;
they	have	to	change	their	life-styles.
So	this	has	to	be	your	initiation	into	sannyas:	drop	all	boundaries,	come	out	of	all
kinds	of	prisons	--
political,	religious,	ideological	--	be	free	of	all	this	rubbish.	Just	be	without	any
definition,	without	any	label,	without	any	category.	And	you	will	be	surprised	--
life	immediately	becomes	ecstatic.
Religion	 to	me	 is	 a	merging	and	meeting	with	bliss.	 It	 has	nothing	 to	do	with
your	beliefs	in	god,	heaven	or	hell,	it	is	a	search	for	bliss.	Hence	whether	one	is	a
theist	 or	 an	 atheist	 does	 not	matter;	what	 you	 believe	 in	 and	what	 you	 do	 not
believe	in	is	irrelevant.
I	have	never	come	across	a	single	human	being	who	is	not	searching	for	bliss.
Hence	 bliss	 is	 the	 universal	 religion.	 I	 don't	 teach	 Christianity,	 Hinduism,
Buddhism,	 I	 teach	 the	 universal	 religion,	 the	 natural	 religion,	 the	 religion	 of
bliss.
Becoming	a	sannyasin	means	that	now	you	will	be	seeking	only	one	thing	and
that	is	how	to	be	more	blissful.	One	has	to	be	a	little	conscious,	that's	all.	It	is	out
of	our	unconsciousness	that	we	go	on	creating	misery.	As	you	become	conscious
of	your	 acts,	 of	your	 thoughts,	 of	your	 feelings,	bliss	 starts	 coming	of	 its	own
accord.
Man	is	born	with	a	diamond	within	his	soul,	but	we	never	dig	within	ourselves,
we	never	 seek	and	 search	 there.	Hence	our	 life	 remains	poor,	hence	we	go	on
searching	in	money,	in	power,	in	prestige,	in	all	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
kinds	of	ways,	running	neither	and	thither	because	there	is	a	constant	inner	urge
to	find	something.	But	we	go	on	searching	in	the	wrong	direction.	The	longing	is
right,	the	direction	is	wrong.	And	the	direction	is	wrong	because	everybody	else
is	doing	the	same	so	we	imitate	them.
Every	child	 is	born	amidst	a	 society	 in	which	people	are	already	 running	after
things	 and	 the	 child	 starts	 running	 after	 things.	 The	 child	 learns	 from	 people;
whatsoever	others	are	doing,	he	starts	doing.
Anthropologists	have	discovered	a	few	very	primitive	tribes	in	the	thick	forests
of	Africa,	Burma,	the	Philippines	and	other	places,	small	tribes	which	have	not
come	 in	 contact	 with	 the	 greater	 humanity	 --	 and	 they	 have	 been	 puzzled,
puzzled	very	much,	shocked	to	see	many	things	of	which	they	were	not	aware	at
all.
For	example,	there	are	tribes	in	which	violence	does	not	exist	at	all.	Nobody	has
ever	been	murdered,	nobody	has	ever	committed	 suicide.	The	people	have	not
heard	 about	 these	 things,	 they	 don't	 have	 words	 for	 murder	 and	 suicide.
Naturally,	it	was	a	shock	to	the	anthropologists:	how	had	these	people	managed
it?
It	is	a	simple	phenomenon	--	children	learn	from	their	elders,	so	whatsoever	the
others	are	doing,	children	start	doing.	Now	our	children	are	seeing	movies	and
TV	 and	murder	 and	 suicide	 and	 robberies,	 and	 all	 kinds	 of	 things.	 They	 will
learn,	 they	are	 learning...	 they	 see	 violence	 everywhere,	 violence	 everywhere,
rape,	murder	 --	 they	 start	 learning	 it	 and	 they	 start	 repeating	 the	 same	pattern.
Their	children	will	learn	from	them.	It	becomes	a	routine	phenomenon.	Because
we	find	that	everybody	is	searching	outside	we	start	searching	outside.	But	 the
treasure	is	within.
Jesus	 says	 again	 and	 again	 'The	 kingdom	 of	 god	 is	 within,'	 but	 even	 his
followers,	his	very	close	followers,	never	understood	him.	I	don't	think	that	his
apostles	 ever	 understood	 him.	 Even	 when	 the	 last	 night	 came	 and	 Jesus	 was
going	to	be	caught	they	were	asking	about	the	kingdom	of	god	in	heaven	and	for
his	whole	life	the	poor	man	was	saying	that	the	kingdom	of	god	is	within	you!
This	was	the	last	conversation	with	the	disciples	and	they	asked	'Just	tell	us	one
thing,	master:	in	the	kingdom	of	god	you	will	be	sitting	on	the	right	side	of	god,
and	out	of	us,	your	twelve	close	disciples,	who	will	be	sitting	next	to	you?'
You	 see	 the	 stupidity?	 --	 the	 politics,	 the	 question	 of	 hierarchy.	And	 the	 poor
man	had	been	saying	 for	his	whole	 life,	 'Blessed	are	 those	who	are	capable	of
standing	at	the	very	back,	who	are	not	hankering	to	be	the	first,	because	they	will
be	the	first.'
But	people	go	on	listening	to	words,	beautiful	words,	they	appreciate	them	also
but	 they	don't	understand.	We	have	missed	Buddha,	we	have	missed	Jesus,	we
have	missed	all	the	great	masters	--	that's	why	there	is	this	miserable	humanity.
My	whole	 effort	 here	 is	 to	help	you	 to	 find	 it	within	yourself:	 it	 is	 there,	 it	 is
already	there.	There	is	no	need	to	go	anywhere,	one	has	just	to	go	within.	And
the	journey	is	not	a	long	one	at	all.	If	it	were	far	away	the	,	of	course,	it	would	be
a	long	journey	and	you	would	need	all	kinds	of	maps	and	guides.	But	there	is	no
journey	in	fact.	You	just	have	to	be	silent,	still,	and	it	is	there.	And	when	one	has
found	the	inner	diamond	one's	life	radiates	the	light	of	god.
Man	has	raw	energies.	They	have	to	be	refined,	and	then	the	same	raw	energies
which	ordinarily	create	misery,	darkness,	despair,	start	creating	great	bliss,	great
celebration.	 They	 are	 the	 same	 energies;	 they	 have	 to	 pass	 through	 a	 subtle
process	of	meditation,	just	a	little	refinement.
For	example,	 the	sun	has	the	same	light	as	the	moon.	In	fact,	 the	moon	has	no
light	 of	 its	 own	 --	 it	 simply	 reflects	 the	 sun's	 light	 --	 but	 you	 can	 see,	 the
difference	 is	 tremendous.	 The	 sunlight	 is	 harsh,	 aggressive,	 hot,	 violent,	 fiery.
The	 same	 light	 reflected	 by	 the	 moon	 suddenly	 becomes	 cool,	 soothing,
peaceful,	serene.	You	can	look	at	the	moon	for	hours	but	you	cannot	look	at	the
sun.	If	you	look	it	will	burn	your	eyes,	it	will	destroy	the	subtle	nervous	system
of	your	brain.	But	the	moon	is	very	soothing,	nourishing.
The	moon's	 light	 is	not	basically	different	but	 it	has	passed	 through	 the	moon.
Meditation	is	like	the	moon:	it	transforms	the	energy	of	lust	into	love,	anger	into
compassion,	 greed	 into	 sharing,	 aggressiveness	 into	 receptivity,	 ego	 into
humbleness.	Moonlight	represents	something	very	significant	because	you	have
to	pass	through	the	same	process,	from	the	sun	to	the	moon,	from	the	extrovert
towards	the	introvert,	from	the	out-going	into	in-going.	And	then	miracles	start
happening,	unbelievable	miracles	start	happening.	One	may	have	never	dreamt,
never	imagined	that	such	beauties	were	possible.	Then	for	the	first	time	one	feels
thankful	to	god	and	prayer	arises	naturally.
Religion	 is	 not	 theology,	 it	 is	 love.	 Theology	 is	 nothing	 but	 logic	 hence	 it	 is
called	'logy'.	And	logic	has	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
nothing	to	do	with	religion,	in	fact	it	is	against	religion.
Logic	 is	a	mind	exercise,	hair-splitting,	word-chopping.	 It	can	create	beautiful,
wordy	 edifices	 but	 they	 are	 just	 castles	made	 in	 the	 sand;	 they	 are	 of	 no	 use.
They	 can	 keep	 you	 occupied,	 they	 serve	 the	 same	 purpose	 as	 when	 you	 are
sitting	on	a	beach	and	you	 start	playing	with	 the	 sand	and	making	 sandcastles
just	because	you	have	nothing	else	to	do.	You	can	enjoy	the	occupation	but	it	is
not	beneficial	at	all,	it	is	childish.
Theologians	 are	 never	 mature	 people.	 Jesus	 is	 not	 a	 theologian,	 neither	 is
Buddha.	 No	 real	 master	 has	 ever	 been	 a	 theologian,	 but	 he	 is	 a	 lover,	 a
tremendous	 lover,	he	 loves	 the	whole	existence.	Love	 is	his	prayer,	 love	 is	his
worship	 and	 through	 love	 existence	 can	 be	 communicated,	 you	 can	 have	 a
dialogue.	All	that	is	needed	is	a	deep	love	affair,	a	mad,	mad	love	affair.
Sannyas	has	to	become	a	love	affair,	only	then	will	you	know	the	mysteries	of
life	and	death.	The	mysteries	are	millions,	in	fact	inexhaustible.
The	people	who	feel	bored	are	the	people	who	are	living	in	the	world	of	logic;
logic	 is	 boring.	 But	 love	 is	 never	 boring.	 Love	 gives	 you	 constant	 surprises.
Love	 keeps	 your	 wonder	 alive	 and	 love	 keeps	 your	 poetry,	 your	 dance,	 your
celebration	nourished,	otherwise	all	that	is	beautiful	in	you	starves,	dies.	Avoid
logic	and	always	choose	love.	Love	is	the	path	of	the	sannyasin.
We	have	nothing	to	offer	to	god	but	we	can	sing,	we	can	dance,	we	can	play	on
some	musical	 instrument.	We	 can	 transform	our	whole	 life	 into	 a	 song,	 into	 a
dance,	into	a	festival	--	and	that	is	the	only	true	offering	to	god.	Plucking	flowers
from	trees	and	offering	them	to	god	is	stupid,	because	those	flowers	are	the	trees,
not	yours;	 in	 fact	 they	were	already	offered	 to	god	by	 the	 tree.	And	 they	were
alive	on	the	tree
--	you	have	killed	them,	you	have	destroyed	their	beauty.	You	are	offering	god
corpses.
You	cannot	offer	words	of	Jesus	to	god;	they	are	his	words,	his	songs.	They	are
beautiful	but	 they	are	borrowed.	They	have	not	arisen	 in	your	own	heart,	 they
don't	have	your	heartbeat,	they	don't	have	your	signature	on	them.	You	can	offer
beautiful	songs	of	Krishna,	Buddha,	but	all	are	borrowed.
My	 basic	 approach	 towards	 god	 is	 that	 every	 person	 has	 to	 have	 his
consciousness	 grow	 into	 a	 flowering	 tree.	 Each	 person	 has	 to	 come	 to	 some
blossoming.	And	of	course,	man's	flowers	will	not	be	like	the	flowers	of	trees;
they	will	 not	be	 like	 roses	or	 lotuses	or	marigolds.	Man's	 flowers	will	 be	of	 a
totally	different	category:	they	will	be	of	love,	they	will	be	of	freedom,	they	will
be	of	joy,	they	will	be	of	a	higher	quality.
I	call	them	songs.
When	 the	 singer	 loses	 himself	 in	 his	 song,	 in	 that	moment	 he	 has	 offered	 the
song	to	god.	When	the	dancer	loses	himself	in	the	dance,	the	dancer	has	offered
his	 dance.	These	 are	 the	only	offerings	which	 are	 accepted,	 these	 are	 the	only
prayers	which	are	heard	and	fulfilled.	And	when	you	start	offering	your	joy,	your
love,	your	songs	to	god,	you	will	be	surprised	that	the	more	you	offer,	the	more
goes	on	showering	on	you;	a	millionfold	it	comes	back.
That	 is	 the	 only	 sign	 that	 they	 have	 reached,	 that	 your	 offering	 has	 been
accepted,	that	your	prayer	has	been	heard.
[Osho	gives	the	name	Prem	Amrita	--	love,	immortality.]
Love	is	the	only	experience	in	life	which	gives	you	a	sense	of	immortality,	which
makes	you	aware	that	there	is	something	which	begins	but	never	ends.	It	is	the
first	lesson,	it	is	the	beginning	of	an	incredible	journey	into	god.
Once	a	man	has	tasted	even	a	drop	of	love	he	cannot	remain	stuck:	he	has	to	go
in	 the	great	exploration	of	god.	 It	becomes	an	urgency	because	now	he	knows
from	his	own	experience	 that	 life	 is	not	 the	ordinary	 routine	 thing	 that	we	had
always	thought	it	was.	There	is	something	more	to	it,	something	hidden	in	it;	the
superficial	is	not	all,	the	superficial	is	only	the	circumference	of	life	and	there	is
a	centre	also.	In	love	we	have	only	a	glimpse,	just	like	lightning:	suddenly	there
is	lightning	and	all	darkness	disappears	and	for	a	split	moment	you	can	see	the
trees,	the	flowers,	the	road	and	everything	and	then	again	there	is	darkness.
But	 now	 the	 darkness	 is	 not	 the	 same;	 you	 know	 that	 there	 is	 something
tremendously	beautiful	hidden	behind	darkness.
It	 is	 love	 that	has	given	 the	 first	glimpse	of	god	and	 then	people	have	 felt	 the
urge	 to	 seek	 and	 search	 deeply.	 It	 is	 through	 love	 that	 they	 discovered
meditation.	Love	is	a	natural	phenomenon,	meditation	is	a	deliberate	science.	In
love	 you	 are	 just	 at	 the	mercy	 of	 the	winds:	 sometimes	 there	 is	 lightning	 and
sometimes	there	is	not,	and	you	cannot	do	anything	about	it.
Meditation	makes	lightning	controllable;	you	can	switch	it	on	and	off.	It	makes
electricity	serve	you.
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished
Query:-
Just	as	science	has	made	electricity	serve	you...	electricity	has	always	existed	but
it	was	beyond	our	control.
Now,	it	is	serving	you	in	thousands	of	ways.
Love	 is	 like	 lightning,	 a	 natural	 phenomenon;	meditation	makes	 it	 a	 scientific
understanding.	Then	you	can	turn	it	on	and	off.	And	in	fact	there	is	no	need	to
turn	it	off;	one	can	live	in	love	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day.	And	when	one	can
live	in	love	for	twenty-four	hours	a	day,	why	should	one	not	live	in	love	twenty-
four	hours	a	day?	Even	a	single	moment	is	not	worth	missing.
My	message	is	of	love	because	I	know	love	is	the	only	phenomenon	which	can
have	universal	appeal	--
because	it	is	natural.	You	may	argue	with	Christianity,	you	may	argue	Hinduism,
you	may	argue	Buddhism,	but	you	cannot	argue	against	love.
And	once	you	have	felt	love,	meditation	starts	of	its	own	accord;	then	you	can	be
easily	 persuaded	 towards	 meditation.	 In	 fact	 you	 are	 already	 persuaded:	 love
seduces	 everyone	 into	 meditation.	 And	 if	 love	 cannot	 seduce	 you	 into
meditation,	then	nothing	else	can.	That	is	the	only	hope,	the	only	promise.	But	it
always	 succeeds,	 it	 has	 never	 failed,	 it	 cannot	 fail.	 It	 is	 inevitable	 that	 after	 a
deep	experience	of	love	meditation	follows.	And	meditation	opens	the	doors	of
the	temple	of	god.
Hari	is	one	of	the	names	of	god.	Prem	means	love	--	love	for	god.	Hari	is	a	rare
name	for	god;	nothing	comparable	to	it	exists	in	any	language	of	the	world.	Hari
means	a	thief.	Now	to	call	god	a	thief	is	something...	something	far	out!	But	it	is
true.	It	is	psychedelic	but	very	true	because	god	steals	your	heart.
And	that's	what	I	go	on	doing	on	his	behalf,	 that's	my	work	too,	 the	work	of	a
thief.
Now	you	have	fallen	into	the	hands	of	a	thief,	so	be	careful!	Not	that	you	have	to
protect	your	heart.
When	I	say	'be	careful'	I	mean	let	me	steal	it.	Don't	be	afraid,	be	care-full!	Don't
be	a	coward,	be	a	brave	man,	a	courageous	man.
If	one	wants	to	love	one	has	to	surrender	oneself.	And	to	be	with	a	master	means
one	 is	 ready	 to	 surrender.	One	 is	 ready	 to	 lose	 oneself	 totally,	with	 no	 strings
attached,	 no	 conditions.	 The	 disciple	 cannot	 make	 any	 conditions	 because	 a
conditional	surrender	is	not	a	surrender	at	all.	One	simply	has	to	be	in	a	 let-go
and	allow	the	master	to	do	the	operation.
It	is	surgical,	because	to	remove	your	heart	is	not	going	to	be	an	easy	task.	And
we	never	replace	 it!	You	can	see	my	people:	 their	hearts	have	disappeared	and
they	are	still	alive,	fully	alive,	more	alive	than	they	have	ever	been.	But	don't	get
too	afraid.	The	surgery	is	done	and	without	any	chloroform.	You	are	kept	fully
awake!
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
