1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Talks	given	from	01/3/81	to	31/3/81
Darshan	Diary
23	Chapters
Year	published:
Unpublished
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#1
Chapter	title:	None
1	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103015
ShortTitle:	CLAPP01
Audio:
No
Video:
No
mind	is	just	the	opposite	of	meditation	it	is	the	closing	of	the	heart	meditation	is
the	 opening	 of	 the	 heart	man	 can	 live	 through	 the	mind	 but	 then	 life	will	 not
have	 any	 significance	 any	 poetry,	 any	 song,	 any	 music	 it	 will	 be	 trivial,
mundane,	superficial	ultimately	frustrating
a	sheer	wastage	of	a	great	opportunity	a	very	ungrateful	way	to	live	because	god
gives	us	such	an	opportunity	to	grow	and	we	only	accumulate	the	non-essential
money,	power,	prestige
there	is	a	famous	book	by	napoleon	hill:	Grow	Rich	that	is	not	a	way	to	grow
that	is	a	way	to	remain	retarded	but	that's	what	has	become	the	philosophy	of	the
common	man	all	over	 the	world	everybody	is	 interested	 in	 the	very	superficial
the	reason	is	that	the	door	to	the	divine	is	closed	and	the	door	to	the	mundane	is
open	our	schools,	colleges	and	universities	are	in	the	service	of	the	society	they
are	agents,	their	function	is	to	close	the	heart	and	to	open	the	head
my	 work	 here	 is	 to	 reclaim	 the	 heart	 once	 the	 heart	 starts	 opening	 your	 life
becomes	a	celebration	mind	divides	you	from	existence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
gives	you	the	idea	of	an	ego	the	heart	unites
gives	you	the	idea	of	oneness	with	the	whole	and	to	feel	one	with	the	whole	is
the	ultimate	in	joy	there	is	no	higher	joy
it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 in	 love	 there	 is	 nothing	 higher	 than	 it	 it	 is	 the	 ultimate	 truth
itself	because	it	brings	harmony,	all	conflict	disappears	life	becomes	a	rhythm
a	rhythm
that	goes	on	deepening	every	moment	the	zen	people	call	it
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
now	there	are	not	two
the	music	 is	 there	but	 it	 is	 not	 a	 struck	music	when	you	play	on	 the	 sitar	 two
things	are	needed	the	instrument	is	needed	and	you	are	needed	you	have	to	strike
the	strings,	it	is	basically	a	conflict	and	out	of	conflict
only	 mundane	 music	 can	 be	 born	 there	 is	 another	 world	 of	 music,	 another
dimension	in	India	we	have	called	it	anahat	nad	unstruck	music
the	player	 and	 the	played-upon	 are	no	more	 two	 the	musician	has	become	 the
music	the	dancer	has	become	the	dance	that	is
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
the	rose	cannot	become	a	rose	because	its	whole	effort	is	diverted	into	becoming
a	lotus
and	a	lotus	it	can	never	become	in	fact	there	is	no	need
if	god	wanted	the	rose	to	become	a	lotus	he	would	have	created	a	 lotus	he	has
created	enough	lotuses	just	the	other	day	i	was	reading	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
if	god	wanted	homosexuality	he	would	have	created	adam	and	bruce	he	didn't
it	is	so	plain
but	 people	 are	 trying	 to	 improve	 upon	 god	 he	 has	 made	 everybody	 what	 he
wanted	so	the	best	thing	is	to	discover	who	am	i
once	you	know	who	you	are
suddenly	all	perfectionism	disappears	because	you	find	you	are	perfect	 there	is
no	need	 to	 be	 perfect	 just	 as	 you	 are,	 you	 are	 perfect	 it	 happens	 only	 through
meditation	because	meditation
is	 simply	 settling	 into	 your	 centre	 relaxing,	 resting	 in	 your	 being,	 to	 discover
who	am	i?
that	very	discovery	is	the	only	true	spirituality	all	else	is	mumbo-jumbo
once	it	is	heard
all	that	is	worth	hearing	has	been	heard	one	can	think	about	truth	but	that	is	not
seeking	 it	 is	 like	 a	 blind	man	 thinking	 about	 light	 he	 can	 go	 on	 thinking	 for
eternity	just	by	thinking	about	and	about	he	is	not	going	to	find	light	 the	word
about	 is	beautiful	 it	means	around	and	around	he	goes	around	in	circles,	never
touching	the	centre	and	that	is	the	way	of	the	mind	of	philosophy,	of	theology	of
all	kinds	of	thinking
it	 happens	 only	 through	meditation	 because	meditation	 is	 simply	 settling	 into
your	centre	relaxing.
resting	in	your	being,	to	discover	the	seeker	of	truth	has	to	stop	thinking	he	has
to	be	utterly	silent,	in	a	state	of	no-thought	the	whole	energy	that	is	involved	in
thinking	has	to	be	released	from	thinking	so	that	it	becomes	awareness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	the	same	energy:	you	can	use	it	as	thought	you	can	use	it	as	awareness	we
don't	have	many	energies	we	have	only	one	energy
but	there	are	different	manifestations	of	the	same	energy
meditation	 is	 not	 using	 your	 energy	 as	 thinking	 but	 using	 your	 energy	 as
awareness	just	being	silent	--	watching,	waiting,	seeing	the	more	you	become	a
seer,	 the	 less	 a	 thinker	 the	closer	you	are	 to	 the	 truth,	 to	 the	 light	 the	moment
your	seeing	is	absolute	you	have	arrived	home
meditation	 is	 an	 inward	 journey	 on	 the	 outside	 there	 are	 challenges	 there	 are
adventures
but	they	are	nothing	compared	to	the	inner	challenges	and	inner	adventures	there
are	enemies	on	the	outside	but	the	inner	enemies	are	far	bigger	only	one	thing	is
different,	and	that	is	that	the	inner	enemies	are	our	own	creation	so	the	moment
we	decide	to	destroy	them	in	that	very	moment	they	can	be	destroyed	they	are
our	make-believe
mind,	ego,	greed,	anger,	jealousy,	possessiveness	all	these	enemies	are	there	but
we	have	been	 feeding	 them,	nourishing	 them	we	can	chop	off	 their	heads	 in	a
single	 blow	 a	whole	 army	 can	 be	 uprooted	 in	 a	 single	moment	 of	 insight	 and
that's	what	meditation	is	a	moment	of	insight	in	which	you	can	see	how	you	have
been	creating	your	own	enemies	and	that	very	seeing
becomes	the	death	of	all	your	enemies	one	reaches	to	the	ultimate	truth	by	using
these	inner	enemies	as	stepping	stones	of	course	only	their	corpses	can	be	used
as	stepping	stones	while	they	are	alive	they	will	create	trouble	they	will	pull	your
legs	 in	 every	 direction	 they	will	 not	 easily	 give	way	hence	 just	 fighting	won't
help	understanding	is	the	key
try	to	understand	the	inner	enemies	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	a	miracle	happens
any	 enemy	 totally	 understood	 evaporates	 in	 that	 very	 understanding	 try	 to
understand	jealousy	and	it	is	no	more	try	to	understand	the	ego	and	it	is	no	more
understanding	functions	 like	a	 light	you	bring	 the	 light	 into	 the	dark	room	and
darkness	is	no	more
meditation	 is	a	bridge	between	you	and	 the	whole	mind	 is	a	wall	between	you
and	the	whole	and	the	same	bricks	are	being	used	you	can	make	a	bridge
you	can	make	a	wall
sannyas	means
dismantling	the	wall	and	using	the	same	bricks	in	creating	a	bridge
it	is	a	simple	phenomenon
it	 is	not	as	difficult	as	people	have	been	told	the	people	who	have	been	saying
that	it	is	difficult	are	basically	on	ego	trips	themselves	of	course	if	it	is	difficult
and	you	have	attained	 it	only	 then	can	your	attainment	be	ego-fulfilling	so	 the
so-called	saints
have	 been	 trying	 to	 say	 to	 people	 that	 it	 is	 very	 arduous,	 that	 it	 is	 almost
impossible	 that	only	very	rare	people	after	 lives	of	effort	and	virtue	attain	 to	 it
and	that	too	only	by	god's	grace	not	only	you	and	your	effort	are	going	to	make
it	unless	god	wills	it	so...	god	willing	that	is	a	necessary	condition	to	it	and	who
knows	when	he	will	will	it	whether	he	will	or	not?
these	so-called	saints
have	been	trying	to	prove	to	humanity	that	meditation	is	very	difficult	that	is	the
only	way	to	pretend	that	they	are	holier-than-thou	that	they	have	attained
and	you	are	lives	away	from	that	attainment	all	that	you	can	do	is	worship	them
my	 approach	 is	 totally	 different	meditation	 is	 the	most	 simple	 phenomenon	 in
life	there	is	nothing	holy	about	it	there	is	nothing	special	about	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	just	a	small	understanding	the	same	bricks	have	to	be	used	but	arranged	in	a
different	way	of	course	and	it	becomes	a	bridge
thoughts	have	the	same	energy	as	the	state	of	no-thought	desires	have	the	same
energy	lust	has	the	same	energy	as	love	there	is	no	fundamental	difference	only
the	manifestation,	 the	 form,	has	 to	be	changed	and	 that	can	be	easily	done	 if	 i
have	been	able	to	do	it	then	anybody	can	do	it
because	you	cannot	find
a	more	unholy	man	in	the	world	meditation	makes	you	aware	of	your	kingdom
of	god
it	is	always	there
you	have	never	lost	it
it	is	just	that	you	are	not	looking	at	it	you	are	looking	outwards	and	it	is	inwards
you	 are	 keeping	 it	 at	 your	 back	 it	 is	 always	 there,	 it	 cannot	 go	 anywhere	 it
follows	you	like	your	shadow	or	even	more	than	that
because	your	shadow	disappears	 in	darkness	but	your	inner	kingdom	is	always
with	you	in	your	misery
in	your	dark	nights	 of	 the	 soul	 even	 if	 you	go	 to	hell	 it	 is	with	you	 it	 is	 your
intrinsic	nature	but	because	we	don't	look	at	it	we	remain	beggars	everybody	is
moving	with	a	begging	bowl	and	the	moment	you	turn	inwards	--
a	one-hundred-and-eighty-degree	turn	--
suddenly	 the	 begging	 bowl	 drops	 from	 your	 hands	 the	moment	 you	 see	what
inexhaustible	 treasures	 are	 given	 to	 you	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 all	 desires
disappear	of	their	own	accord	religions	have	been	telling	people	just	the	opposite
they	have	been	telling	people	to	first	become	desireless	then	they	will	attain	the
kingdom	of	god	that	is	putting	everything	upside-down	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	is	putting	the	horses	behind	the	cart	neither	the	cart	can	move	nor	the	horses
can	move	all	movement	stops
it	 is	 just	 a	 wrong	 arrangement	 one	 cannot	 drop	 desiring	 unless	 one	 finds	 the
inexhaustible	treasures	of	one's	being	so	my	statement	is	just	the	opposite	i	say
forget	 all	 about	 desiring,	 it	 is	 natural	 the	 begging	 bowl	 is	 bound	 to	 be	 there
because	you	don't	know
that	you	are	a	king	or	a	queen	so	first	become	acquainted	with	your	nature	then	it
is	up	to	you
if	you	still	want	to	carry	the	begging	bowl	it	is	perfectly	okay
but	i	have	never	heard
of	anybody	carrying	a	begging	bowl	once	he	has	seen	his	infinite	treasures	so	i
don't	say	become	desireless	then	you	will	become	a	master	i	say	be	a	master	and
you	will	 become	desireless	desirelessness	will	 be	 a	 consequence,	 a	by-product
hence	my	insistence	on	meditation	because	that	is	the	art	of	turning	around	one-
hundred-and-eighty	degrees	you	can	 stand	 in	 the	 sun	with	 closed	 eyes	 the	 sun
cannot	force	your	eyes	to	open	existence	is	very	non-violent	it	never	shouts
it	only	whispers
it	never	knocks	on	your	doors	it	simply	stands	there
it	waits,	it	has	patience
it	trusts	that	one	day,	sooner	or	later	you	will	open	the	door
you	will	 open	 your	 eyes	 and	 you	will	 see	 the	 light	meditation	means	 opening
your	eyes	opening	your	doors
to	see	the	light	that	is	always	there	once	you	have	seen	it
your	whole	being	is	transformed	illuminated,	enlightened
because	 suddenly	 you	 recognize	 that	 you	 are	 not	 separate	 from	 the	 source	 of
light	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	It	Is	the	same	light
that	 they	 are	 both	 joined	 together	 that	 feeling	of	 being	one	with	 the	 source	of
light	brings	immense	freedom
fearlessness,	desirelessness	and	after	that	experience	whatsoever	you	do	is	right
hence	I	don't	give	you	any	commandments	do	this,	don't	do	this	--	no	shoulds,	no
should-nots	i	don't	give	you	any	discipline	i	only	give	you	a	simple	call	to	open
your	eyes	and	to	see	the	light
and	after	that
it	 is	 impossible	 to	 do	 anything	wrong	 then	 a	 self-discipline	 comes	 of	 its	 own
accord	and	when	discipline	comes	of	its	own	accord	it	has	a	beauty	of	its	own	it
has	 a	 spontaneity,	 it	 has	 joyfulness	 it	 has	 a	 dancing	 quality	 in	 it	 it	 is	 festive,
playful,	innocent,	unpretending	it	does	not	make	you	a	saint	it	simply	makes	you
very	simple	extraordinarily	ordinary
meditation	is	the	discovery	of	the	perfect	centre	within	ourselves	the	moralists,
the	priests	the	politicians,	the	puritans	all	kinds	of	so-called	leaders	of	humanity
have	been	teaching	people	for	thousands	of	years	to	be	perfect
they	 have	 driven	 almost	 everybody	 crazy	 they	 have	 created	 a	 great	 fever	 for
perfectionism,	and	perfectionism
is	the	fundamental	source	of	all	neurosis	once	a	person	becomes	obsessed	with
being	perfect	he	is	a	goner
i	 don't	 tell	 anybody	 to	be	perfect	 perfection	 is	 not	 something	 that	 you	have	 to
attain	it	is	your	nature
it	has	not	to	be	attained	but	only	discovered	and	the	methods	of	attainment	and
discovery	are	totally	different
the	 method	 of	 attainment	 is	 cultivation	 become	 more	 perfect,	 become	 more
perfect	go	on	improving
go	on	dropping	flaws,	errors,	mistakes	go	on	polishing	your	ego
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	method	of	discovery	is	not	of	cultivation	it	is	becoming	silent
so	that	you	can	feel
who	you	are
before	one	tries	to	be	perfect	one	should	know	who	am	i?	where	do	i	stand?
what	is	my	nature?
if	without	knowing	that	you	are	a	marigold	you	start	trying	to	be	a	perfect	rose
you	will	go	crazy
to	become	perfect	roses
roses	have	the	desire	to	become	perfect	lotuses	this	is	how	the	whole	world	goes
on	becoming	more	and	more	cuckoo	everybody	 is	chasing	something	which	 is
not	his	nature
so	all	that	happens	is	that	the	marigold	cannot	become	a	marigold
and	it	cannot	become	a	rose	either	so	there	is	simply	misery
every	man,	every	woman,	every	tree	every	bird,	every	flower
has	its	own	uniqueness
it	is	incomparable
but	 we	 are	 continuously	 taught	 to	 compare	 this	 is	 how	 the	 society	 creates	 a
hierarchy	 somebody	 is	 superior	 to	 you	 somebody	 is	 inferior	 to	 you	 of	 course
with	the	inferior	you	behave	in	one	way	with	the	superior	in	another	way	you	are
constantly	trying
to	 rise	 higher	 in	 the	 hierarchy	 and	 you	 are	 constantly	 preventing	 others	 from
rising	 higher	 than	 you	 this	 is	 our	 whole	 unnecessary	 life	 our	 whole	 mess,
confusion,	chaos	and	all	depends	on	a	simple	thing	the	idea	of	comparison
comparison	brings	 competition	 comparison	brings	wounds	 and	ego	on	 the	one
hand	wounds
because	 there	are	people	who	are	superior	 to	you	and	wounds	are	bound	 to	be
and	on	the	other	hand	it	brings	ego	because	there	are	people	who	are	inferior	to
you	and	you	are	crushed	between	these	two	rocks	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	the	whole	thing	is	invented	you	are	simply	yourself
you	don't	belong	to	any	hierarchy	nobody	is	higher	than	you
and	nobody	is	 lower	than	you	because	nobody	is	 like	you	hence	comparison	is
impossible	and	competition	is	futile
one	has	just	to	be	oneself	that's	my	basic	message
the	moment	you	accept	yourself	as	you	are	all	burdens,	all	mountainous	burdens
simply	disappear
then	life	is	a	sheer	joy
a	festival	of	lights
this	discovery	of	one's	uniqueness	happens	only	when	you	become	a	little	silent
calm	and	quiet
and	you	drop	out	of	all	those	imposed	ideas	which	the	society	has	been	throwing
upon	you	from	the	very	childhood
these	do-gooders
they	may	be	parents,	they	may	be	teachers	they	may	be	priests...
and	i	don't	suspect	their	intentions	their	intentions	are	good
but	 they	are	unconscious	people	and	unconscious	peoples'	good	 intentions	also
bring	bad	results
they	may	like	you,	they	may	love	you	they	may	desire	for	you	a	beautiful	life	but
they	have	lived	in	ugliness	they	have	lived	in	suffering	they	can	only	impart	their
suffering	to	you	they	will	teach	you	the	same	strategies	that	they	have	followed
they	will	teach	you	the	same	ideas	that	they	have	lived	by
they	will	give	their	lifestyle	to	you	and	they	are	enough	proof
that	their	lifestyle	has	been	an	utter	failure	but	still	they	will	go	on	giving	you	the
same	thing	each	generation	gives	its	diseases	to	the	other	generation
generations	die,	diseases	seem	to	be	immortal	people	come	and	go	but	diseases
remain	and	if	you	decide	to	get	out	of	that	bondage	they	feel	betrayed
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
they	would	like	you	to	just	repeat	their	life	although	they	have	been	miserable	so
i	don't	suspect	 their	 intentions	but	 intentions	don't	mean	anything	at	all	all	 that
has	significance	is	consciousness	not	unconscious	good	intentions	--
and	there	are	very	few	people	who	are	conscious	to	be	in	tune	with	a	conscious
person	is	to	be	a	disciple
to	be	a	sannyasin
a	conscious	person	can	help	you	to	discover	yourself
he	does	not	impose	anything	upon	you	he	does	not	programme	you
he	 simply	 deprogrammes	 you	 and	 leaves	 you	 open,	 available,	 a	 clean	 slate	 so
you	 can	make	 your	 own	 signature	 you	 can	write	 your	 own	 song	 and	 you	 can
dance	 your	 own	 dance	 and	 the	 greatest	 experience	 in	 life	 is	 the	 experience	 of
one's	 uniqueness	 meditation	 is	 not	 something	 serious	 it	 is	 a	 very	 very	 long
tradition	that	says	meditation	is	very	serious	--
it	is	not
it	is	very	playful
it	is	closer	to	song	than	to	anything	else	closer	to	dance	than	anything	else	closer
to	 love	 than	 anything	 else	 meditation	 cannot	 be	 serious	 by	 its	 very	 nature
seriousness	is	part	of	the	mind	playfulness	is	part	of	the	heart.
and	meditation	means	 slipping	out	of	 the	head	and	entering	 into	 the	heart	 it	 is
getting	out	of	the	serious	affairs	of	life	into	an	attitude	of	playfulness	the	head	is
old
the	heart	is	always	new,	fresh	like	dewdrops	in	the	early	morning	sun	as	fresh	as
new	 roses	 opening	 as	 fresh	 as	 the	 stars	 in	 the	 night	 it	 is	 not	 old	 like	 the	 old
testament	it	is	not	old	like	the	ancient	vedas	it	is	very	young	like	a	just-born	baby
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
with	fresh	eyes
unburdened,	uncluttered,	with	no	dust	a	mirror
so	that	has	to	be	remembered	being	here	with	me	simply	means	being	playful
non-serious
joyous
i	don't	teach	renunciation	i	teach	rejoicing
and	the	more	you	rejoice
the	more	you	become	capable	of	receiving	new	gifts	from	the	divine
the	more	you	are	playful
the	more	god	is	with	you
the	more	you	are	fresh,	young,	alive	the	more	stars	come	down	towards	you	they
start	filtering	into	your	very	being	they	start	reaching	your	very	heart	the	serious
person	is	a	dead	person	he	has	already	committed	suicide	he	will	live
but	his	life	will	be	only	a	kind	of	vegetation	he	will	be	a	cabbage,	a	cauliflower,
a	potato	but	these	people	have	become	saints	in	the	past	remember...
saint	potato,	saint	cauliflower	very	serious	people
look	at	a	potato
you	will	never	find	a	potato	non-serious	so	beware	of	seriousness
it	is	the	greatest	sin
live	your	life	as	fun
and	that	is	the	greatest	virtue	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#2
Chapter	title:	None
2	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Archive	code:	8103025
ShortTitle:	CLAPP02
Audio:
No
Video:
No
the	mind	is	doubt	--	every	mind,	mind	as	such	hence	nobody	should	think	that	he
is	without	 doubt	 because	whatsoever	 is	 done	 through	 the	mind	 is	 bound	 to	 be
doubt-full
even	 the	 so-called	 beliefs	 are	 nothing	 but	 cover-ups	 for	 doubt	 one	 believes	 so
that	one	can	escape	from	doubt	doubt	is	like	a	wound
but	belief	is	not	a	healing	force	it	only	covers	the	wound
it	deceives	others	but	that	is	not	very	significant	it	deceives	you	--	that	is	of	real
importance	to	live	in	self-deception
is	to	miss	the	whole	point	of	life	there	are	only	two	ways	to	deal	with	doubt	you
can	cover	up	your	doubt	with	belief	millions	of	people	all	over	the	world	have
been	doing	that	for	millions	of	years	doubt	remains	and	goes	on	growing	like	a
cancerous	thing
the	other	way	is	to	go	into	your	doubt	rather	than	hiding,	deceiving	encounter	it,
face	it,	dig	it	and	that	is	the	way	to	transcend	it	if	one	encounters	one's	doubt	one
can	immediately	see
that	one	is	separate	from	one's	doubts	they	are	there	like	objects,	you	are	here	the
mirror	that	reflects	them	the	awareness	that	encounters	them	this	very	experience
takes	you	beyond	doubt	that	is	the	state	of	faith,	of	trust	and	that	is	the	beginning
of	sannyas	desiring	includes	all	desires	--
the	worldly,	the	other-worldly	material,	the	spiritual
the	mundane,	the	sacred
so	it	is	not	a	question	of	choosing	either	one	drops	the	whole	of	desiring	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
or	one	remains	in	the	grip	of	it	the	so-called	religious	people	are	still	in	the	grip
of	it	they	may	not	desire	money
but	they	desire	meditation	they	may	not	desire	power
but	they	desire	god
they	 may	 not	 desire	 things	 of	 the	 world	 but	 they	 desire	 the	 kingdom	 of	 the
beyond	it	is	the	same	desire
it	 has	 come	 in	 from	 the	 backdoor	 again	 you	 have	 to	 be	 very	 watchful	 not	 to
allow	desire	in	any	form	to	enter	you	because	desire	is	bondage,	desire	is	misery,
desire	is	hell	the	more	full	of	desires	one	is	the	more	frustrations	one	is	breeding
because	each	desire	will	end	in	frustration	whether	it	succeeds	or	fails	makes	no
difference	frustration	is	bound	to	happen,	it	is	inevitable
if	the	desire	fails
and	 out	 of	 one	 hundred	 desires	 ninety-nine	 are	 bound	 to	 fail	 because	 it	 is	 a
competitive	world	you	are	not	alone
many	people	are	desiring	the	same	things	there	are	not	enough	things	and	people
are	many	 things	 are	 scarce	 and	 people	 are	millions	 how	many	 people	 can	 be
presidents	how	many	people	 can	be	prime	ministers	very	 few...	 but	 everybody
wants	to	be	hence	ninety-nine	per	cent	of	desires	are	bound	to	fail,	and	then	there
will	 be	 great	 frustration	 one	 per	 cent	 of	 desires	 may	 succeed	 but	 frustration
comes	all	the	same	in	fact	more	so
because	when	 a	 desire	 succeeds	 for	 the	 first	 time	 you	 become	 aware	 that	 you
have	wasted	your	whole	life	for	it	and	nothing	is	attained
money	is	there
but	your	poverty	remains	untouched	by	it	your	inner	emptiness	remains	the	same
in	fact
in	contrast	with	the	money	that	you	have	achieved	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
your	inner	emptiness
looks	even	emptier	than	before	you	have	attained	power	outside	but	deep	inside
you	 know	 you	 are	 impotent	 impotent	 in	 the	 face	 of	 death	 one	 has	 to	 die,	 no
power	can	save	one	so	whether	a	desire	succeeds	or	fails	it	fails	all	the	same
this	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental	truths	to	be	understood
once	you	see	the	point
then	you	don't	 go	 on	 changing	horses	 because	 they	 are	 all	 the	 same	 the	 black
horse	and	 the	white	horse,	devil	 and	god	 it	doesn't	make	much	difference	 it	 is
just	the	difference	between	a	black	horse	and	a	white	horse	they	will	all	lead	you
into	misery	then	one	simply	gets	out	of	the	whole	trip	one	forgets	desiring,	one
starts	 living	 desiring	 is	 always	 somewhere	 else	 the	 fulfilment	 is	 in	 the	 future
living
is	now
here
these	are	the	only	two	ways	to	create	a	style	of	life
living	in	the	future
which	is	only	so-called	living	because	the	future	is	non-existential	and	living	in
the	present
which	is	the	only	way
of	living,	authentic	living	time	consists	only	of	two	tenses,	not	of	three	ordinarily
it	 is	 divided	 into	 three	 parts	 the	 past,	 the	 present	 and	 the	 future	 that	 is
existentially	wrong	grammatically	 it	may	be	right	 linguistically	 it	may	be	right
but	i	have	no	concern	with	language	and	grammar	my	concern	is	with	existence
as	far	as	existence	is	concerned	time	only	consists	of	past	and	future	the	present
is	not	part	of	time	it	is	part	of	existence
existence	is	always	now,	it	is	never	then	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	never	yesterday,	never	tomorrow	it	is	this	very	moment
and	to	go	beyond	time
is	 the	whole	art	of	meditation	meditation	 is	 the	 transcendence	of	 time	past	and
future	both
and	the	plunging	into	the	now,	the	here.
the	deeper	you	plunge	into	the	now	and	the	here	the	more	you	disappear
because	mind	cannot	exist	without	past	and	future	mind	is	like	a	pendulum	of	a
clock	it	moves	from	one	opposite	to	the	other	from	right	to	left,	from	left	to	right
stop	it	in	the	middle	and	the	clock	stops	mind	moves	between	past	and	future	the
clock	of	the	mind
stop	it	 in	 the	middle	and	the	clock	stops	and	the	moment	 the	mind	is	not	 there
you	are	not
then	god	is
then	freedom	is
then	love	is
then	flowering	is
then	eternity	is
there	 are	 many	 boundaries	 around	 us	 we	 are	 the	 centre	 of	 many	 concentric
circles	and	we	have	to	go	beyond
all	those	concentric	circles	only	then	can	we	find	the	centre	the	most	important
concentric	circles	are	four	the	first	is	the	world	of	objects	the	majority	of	people
is	 concerned	 with	 the	 world	 of	 objects	 money,	 power,	 prestige,	 respectability
they	remain	very	peripheral	presidents,	prime	ministers	queens,	rotarians,	lions
you	 will	 find	 all	 Kinds	 of	 stupid	 people	 hanging	 onto	 the	 very	 outermost
circumference	and	making	much	fuss	about	it	the	second	concentric	circle	is	of
the	 body	many	 live	 in	 the	 body,	 particularly	women	man	 hangs	 onto	 the	 first
more,	 the	 most	 peripheral	 his	 concern	 is	 more	 about	 things,	 objects	 far-away
objects
what	is	happening	in	israel	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	what	is	happening	in	korea	the	woman	is	not	so	concerned	about	korea	and
israel
she	is	most	concerned	about	the	colour	of	her	hair,	her	eyelashes	the	proportion
of	her	body	she	looks	at	the	male	as	being	a	little	bit	crazy	you	are	unnecessarily
worried	about	the	stars	and	the	speed	of	light	what	have	you	to	do	with	it	the	real
thing	is	the	furniture	the	curtains,	the	pillows
the	kitchen,	the	bathroom
it	looks	more	mundane	to	man	it	looks	more	earthly
but	in	a	way	she	is	closer	but	many	men	also	remain	there	they	have	to	because
their	wives	are	there	their	girlfriends	are	there	they	cannot	go	to	israel
they	cannot	go	to	the	moon	they	cannot	go	to	everest
they	are	possessed	by	their	women	they	won't	allow	them	to
so	they	also	have	to	be	just	very	close	near	the	kitchen,	the	bathroom	maybe	the
woman	looks	at	the	mirror	and	they	clean	the	mirror
but	they	are	not	very	far	either	millions	of	people
simply	 live	at	 the	physiological,	 the	biological	 the	chemical	 level	of	 life	closer
than	 that	 is	 another	 concentric	 circle	 that	 of	 the	 mind:	 thoughts,	 ideas
philosophers,	theologians,	thinkers,	scientists	these	people	live	there
closer	than	that
is	the	concentric	circle	of	the	heart	the	poets,	the	painters
the	musicians,	the	dancers	the	aesthetic	people	live	there	but	all	are	outside	your
real	 being	 one	 has	 to	 transcend	 all	 these	 four	 boundaries	 only	 then	 does	 one
encounter	oneself	then	for	the	first	time
one	stands	face-to-face	to	oneself	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	that	is	the	moment	of	great	illumination	when	you	see	your	centre
you	have	seen	all	that	is	worth	seeing	you	have	seen	god	himself
you	have	seen	the	truth
there	is	nothing	higher	than	that	nothing	deeper	than	that
nothing	more	valuable	 than	 that	sannyas	 is	 the	 transcendence	of	all	boundaries
so	 that	 one	 day	 you	 can	 simply	 relax	 in	 your	 very	 centre	 that	 centre	 is
consciousness	awareness
godliness
life	is	one	energy
but	out	of	that	one	energy	we	can	either	create	love	or	attachment	love	is	heaven,
attachment	is	hell	we	can	create	out	of	that	energy	bondage	or	freedom
it	all	depends	on	us
on	how	we	work	upon	our	energy	the	lower	is	cheaper	and	easier	to	create	hell
does	not	need	much	intelligence	it	does	not	even	need	courage	all	that	it	needs	is
imitation	because	millions	of	people	are	doing	the	same	thing	all	around	you	you
can	just	imitate	them
your	parents,	your	teachers,	your	leaders	it	is	simple
you	will	 become	a	 carbon	 copy	you	will	 live	 in	 the	 same	kind	of	 hell	misery,
anguish
and	you	will	give	to	your	children,	your	heritage	and	they	will	repeat	the	same
pattern	this	way	it	goes	on	and	on	from	adam	and	eve	up	to	you	it	has	been	going
on	in	the	same	way	only	very	few	people
have	been	able	to	get	out	of	the	rut	and	those	are	the	salt	of	the	earth	a	jesus,	a
buddha,	a	lao	tzu	a	zarathustra,	a	kabir	--	very	few	people	they	can	be	counted	on
one's	fingers	they	are	real	miracles	in	existence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
because	to	get	out	of	the	rut	of	the	crowd	is	really	a	great	act
of	 courage,	 intelligence,	 rebellion	 the	 crowd	 lives	 in	 attachment	 attachment	 to
money
attachment	to	children
attachment	to	parents
attachment	to	wives,	husbands	attachment	to	this	and	that	there	are	thousands	of
attachments	and	they	think	it	is	love
because	they	think	it	is	love	they	cannot	get	out	of	it
so	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 to	 label	 things	 correctly	 to	 categorise	 things	 correctly
attachment	 is	 love	 standing	 upside-down	 attachment	 is	 love	 gone	 sour
attachment	 is	 an	 ill	 state	 of	 love	 love	 is	 a	 healthy	 phenomenon	 attachment	 is
sick,	 nauseating	 and	 everybody	 experiences	 it	 the	more	 you	 become	 attached,
the	more	miserable	the	more	you	allow	others
to	become	attached	to	you
the	more	miserable	they	become	and	of	course
we	become	infected	with	each	other's	misery	and	it	is	never	a	simple	addition	it
is	always	multiplication	a	sannyasin	has	to	learn
what	the	causes	of	his	misery	are	and	you	will	find
one	 of	 the	most	 significant	 causes	 is	 attachment	 don't	 be	 attached	 to	 anything
live
live	 totally,	 live	 lovingly	 but	 don't	 possess,	 don't	 dominate	 and	 don't	 allow
anybody
to	 possess	 or	 dominate	 you	 if	 you	 want	 to	 be	 really	 blissful	 and	 if	 you	 are
blissful	you	can	share	love	love	is	a	sharing	of	bliss	attachment	is	a	sharing	of
misery	it	is	ugly,	it	is	inhuman
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
love	brings	freedom	to	you	and	also	freedom	to	the	person	you	love	let	that	be
the	criterion
if	it	brings	freedom	it	is	love	if	it	brings	bondage	it	is	attachment	attachment	has
to	be	dropped	and	love	has	to	be	grown
the	more	loving	you	become	the	closer	you	are	to	god
jesus	is	right	when	he	says	god	is	love
man	lives	in	words
the	words	can	be	beautiful	but	they	are	all	empty	the	word	god	is	not	god
the	word	love	is	not	love	either	you	cannot	be	nourished	by	the	word	food	and
you	cannot	quench	your	thirst	with	the	word	water
words	are	dangerous
they	 can	 keep	 you	 in	 deception	 they	 can	 give	 you	 the	 feeling	 as	 if	 you	 know
millions	of	people	think	they	know	god	because	they	know	the	word	millions	of
people	think	they	know	love	because	they	know	the	word	a	sannyasin	has	to	get
beyond	words	to	the	real	content
he	has	to	disperse	words
and	to	see	what	is	hidden	behind	them	that's	the	exploration
just	as	one	goes	on	peeling	an	onion	one	has	to	go	on	peeling	words	so	one	can
come	to	the	very	core	of	them	and	the	miracle	is
when	you	go	on	peeling	words	like	an	onion	ultimately	you	come	to	emptiness,
nothingness	is	the	ultimate	sense	of	existence	that	is	silence
when	 all	 noise	 of	 the	 words	 has	 left	 you	 and	 there	 is	 only	 profound	 silence
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
undisturbed,	undistracted
in	 that	silence	knowing	happens	seeing	happens,	being	happens	bibles,	korans,
gitas	cannot	give	it	to	you	--
they	are	all	words,	they	are	beautiful	they	were	spoken	by	beautiful	people	but
that	does	not	make	any	difference	even	if	buddha	says	the	word	rose	it	does	not
become	a	rose
even	if	jesus	says	the	word	fire	it	does	not	become	fire
but	beautiful	people	can	be	 so	hypnotic	 that	you	 start	believing	 in	 their	words
christians,	hindus,	mohammedans,	buddhists	are	all	doing	the	same
they	 have	 all	 forgotten	 the	 reality	 and	 are	 clinging	 to	 the	 labels	 they	 are	 all
clinging	to	the	cages	maybe	they	are	golden	cages	but	the	bird,	the	alive	bird,	the
singing	bird	is	no	more	there
the	search	of	sannyas
is	for	the	alive,	the	singing	bird	man	has	two	alternatives
two	possible	orientations
one	is	character,	the	other	is	consciousness	character	is	imposed	from	the	outside
it	is	a	political	and	social	strategy	to	dominate	the	person
consciousness	 is	 individual,	 character	 is	 social	 all	 societies	 are	 against
consciousness	and	for	character
because	they	can	manipulate	character	it	is	within	their	grasp
they	can	paint	it
according	 to	 their	own	investment	 they	can	cut	you	 into	shape	 to	 fit	with	 their
mechanism	they	can	make	you	obedient	through	it	they	can	make	you	a	slave
and	that	is	the	desire
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
of	all	the	establishment
but	the	real	master
never	gives	you	character
he	gives	you	consciousness	consciousness	is	a	discovery	of	your	own	being	no
discipline	is	imposed	on	you	in	fact	all	discipline	is	disposed	of	you	are	allowed
to	be	yourself,	authentically	as	god	means	you	to	be
one	 has	 to	 discover	 one's	 nature	 one's	 spontaneity,	 one's	 original	 face	 that	 is
consciousness
the	very	discovery
makes	you	more	and	more	conscious	the	deeper	you	go	into	it
the	more	conscious	you	become	a	point	comes	when	you	are	just	a	flame	of	light
and	in	that	light	whatsoever	you	do	is	right	in	that	light
wrong	 is	 impossible	 and	 right	 is	 inevitable	 then	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of
character	 comes	 like	 a	 shadow	 following	 consciousness	 i	 call	 that	 character
religious,	spiritual	the	so-called	character	in	the	world	is	just	political,	social
it	has	no	value	at	all
so	go	beyond	the	ordinary	character	so	that	you	can	find	the	real	character	and
the	way	to	find	the	real	is	through	consciousness
the	master	cannot	say	anything	about	truth	truth	is	inexpressible
it	is	beyond	all	indications	it	cannot	even	be	pointed	at	because	it	is	not	an	object
--	it	 is	all	over	so	when	you	point	at	it	 in	a	direction	you	are	already	falsifying
because	it	is	not	in	one	direction	it	is	the	whole	space
no	 gesture	 is	 capable	 of	 capturing	 it	 hence	 the	 only	 way	 is	 to	 go	 beyond
language	 to	 go	 beyond	 scriptures,	 to	 go	 beyond	 indications	 to	 go	 beyond	 all
possible	symbols,	metaphors	and	just	to	be	in	tune	with	the	master	just	in	a	silent
communion	nothing	is	said,	nothing	is	heard	and	yet	it	happens
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
say	something	and	it	will	be	misunderstood	try	to	understand	it
and	 you	 have	 already	 misunderstood	 it	 neither	 saying	 is	 going	 to	 help	 nor
listening	is	going	to	help	the	master	is	silent,	the	disciple	is	silent	slowly	slowly
the	two	silences	merge	and	become	one	and	when	the	two	silences	become	one
you	hear
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
that	 is	 beyond	 alI	 expression	 and	 that	 is	 the	moment	 of	 enlightenment	 it	 is	 a
transmission	 beyond	 the	 words	 beyond	 indications,	 beyond	 scriptures	 just	 a
flame	jumping	into	another	heart	a	quantum	leap	from	a	lit	lamp	to	an	unlit	lamp
the	 lit	 lamp	 loses	nothing	and	 the	unlit	gains	everything	 it	 is	a	 transmission	of
light	a	transmission	of	the	lamp	so	the	disciple	has	to	learn	only	one	thing	how	to
sit	in	silence,	in	tremendous	love	waiting
waiting	 for	 the	moment	when	 it	 comes	not	 desiring,	 not	 expecting	not	 asking,
not	demanding
just	waiting
that	is	the	very	soul	of	sannyas	the	word	waiting
truth	is	beyond	discussion	it	cannot	be	discussed
either	you	see	it	or	you	don't	see	it	it	cannot	be	proved
no	 argument	 can	 support	 it	 or	 destroy	 it	 it	 is	 not	 a	 question	 of	 philosophical
debate	because	 it	 is	not	 intellectual	 at	 alI	hence	 the	most	 futile	 exercise	 in	 the
world	is	philosophy
it	is	just	hair-splitting,	absolutely	pointless	the	most	stupid	thing
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	 one	 can	 get	 involved	 in	 is	 philosophy	 after	 thousands	 of	 years	 of
philosophical	analysis	not	a	single	conclusion	has	been	reached	not	a	single	truth
has	been	arrived	at	that	is	enough	reason
for	 philosophy	 being	 dropped,	 completely	 dropped	 it	 is	 an	 exercise	 in	 utter
futility	this	is	where	sannyas
takes	 a	 totally	 different	 route	 sannyas	 basically	 means	 mysticism	 it	 is	 not
philosophical,	 it	 is	existential	we	are	not	searching	 to	know	about	 truth	we	are
not	trying	to	know	about	truth	we	are	trying	to	be	the	truth	and	to	be	the	truth	is
the	only	way	to	know	it	there	is	no	other	way
unless	you	have	tasted	it	totally	so	totally	that	it	has	become	part	of	your	blood,
bone	and	marrow	you	will	not	know	it
unless	you	have	become	it
there	is	no	knowing	of	it
truth	cannot	be	an	object
it	becomes	your	very	subjectivity	truth	is	subjectivity,	your	very	innermost	core
it	 is	 self-discovery;	hence	one	has	 to	drop	all	 the	patterns	of	argumentation	all
the	methods	 of	 analysis	 all	 doubts,	 all	 beliefs,	 all	 systems	 of	 thought	 theistic,
atheistic
catholic,	protestant,	hindu,	mohammedan	one	has	to	get	rid	of	the	whole	fabric
of	the	mind	the	whole	junk	has	to	be	burned	so	that	one	is	simply	in	a	state	of
not-knowing	and	in	that	very	state	of	not-knowing	the	flower	of	knowing	opens
up	 in	 the	 east	 we	 have	 called	 the	 flower	 the	 one-thousand-petalled	 lotus	The
Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#3
Chapter	title:	None
3	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Archive	code:	8103035
ShortTitle:	CLAPP03
Audio:
No
Video:
No
in	fact	a	relaxed	person	can	move	can	make	better	effort
and	 a	 man	 of	 efficient	 effort	 can	 be	 better	 relaxed	 there	 is	 no	 intrinsic
contradiction	the	contradiction	exists	only	in	words,	language	and	in	the	mind
the	experience	of	bliss
is	one	of	the	most	paradoxical	paradoxical	in	the	sense	that	you	have	to	manage
two	logical	contradictions	together	you	have	to	be	effortlessly	effortful	because
both	effort	and	relaxation	are	needed	for	the	experience	to	happen	but	it	can	be
managed	because	the	contradictions	are	only	superficial
deep	 down	 they	 are	 complementaries	 one	 should	 try	 a	 few	 experiments	 for
example,	you	can	run:	 there	 is	effort	but	still	you	can	remain	very	relaxed	you
can	bicycle:	there	is	effort	but	at	the	same	time
your	whole	body
can	remain	very	quiet	calm	and	relaxed	you	can	move	your	hand:	there	is	effort
but	you	can	move	the	hand	with	such	grace	with	such	a	relaxedness	that	there	is
no	effort	at	all	then	it	becomes	the	very	foundation	for	bliss	to	descend
this	is	the	whole	art	of	sannyas	one	has	to	make	tremendous	effort	yet	one	has	to
remember	 that	 bliss	 is	 a	 gift	 of	 god	 so,	 just	 by	 your	 effort	 it	 is	 not	 going	 to
happen	and	without	your	effort
it	 is	 not	 going	 to	 happen	 either	 man	 has	 fallen	 into	 both	 extremes	 there	 are
people	who	think	it	is	a	gift	of	god	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
so	nothing	can	be	done	we	just	have	to	wait	it	will	never	happen,	just	waiting	is
not	enough	through	waiting	with	great	effort	through	doing	whatsoever	you	can
do	to	the	uttermost
and	then	waiting
it	happens
the	other	 extreme	 is:	 if	 it	 happens	 through	our	 effort	 then	we	will	make	every
effort	what	is	the	need	of	prayer	what	is	the	need	of	god's	help?
if	it	is	going	to	happen	through	our	effort	then	we	will	manage
we	will	do	all	kinds	of	yoga,	 austerities,	practices	we	will	have	a	discipline,	 a
character	a	morality.	virtue
and	it	will	happen
it	does	not	happen
because	whatsoever	you	can	do	will	remain	trivial	it	prepares	you	to	receive	the
gift	but	 it	does	not	bring	 the	gift	 itself	 it	makes	you	receptive,	welcoming,	but
that's	all	when	the	guest	comes
it	comes	just	by	your	opening	of	the	door	there	is	no	intrinsic	necessity	for	the
guest	to	come	keep	the	door	open,	remain	alert,	watchful	doing	everything	that
you	can	do	so	it	cannot	be	said
that	you	have	not	done	anything	don't	leave	a	single	stone	unturned	on	your	part
everything	should	be	fulfilled	in	that	very	instant	when	you	are	finished	and	you
cannot	 do	 any	more	 the	miracle	 happens:	 bliss	 descends	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	most
paradoxical	experiences	hence	millions	of	 religious	people	have	missed	 it	 they
were	searching,	seeking	but	they	still	missed	it	there	are	two	kinds	of	religions	in
the	world	one	believes	in	prayer
christianity,	islam,	hinduism	--	they	believe	in	prayer	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
because	they	think	bliss	is	the	gift	of	god	all	that	you	can	do	is	pray	ask	and	it
shall	be	given	unto	you	knock	and	the	door	shall	be	opened	all	that	is	needed	on
your	part	 is	prayer	the	other	kind	of	religiousness	is	 that	of	 jainism,	buddhism,
yoga	 they	 believe	 in	 effort,	 not	 in	 prayer	 because	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 prayer
jainism	and	buddhism
deny	the	very	existence	of	god	if	there	is	no	need	for	prayer	there	is	no	need	for
anybody	 to	 pray	 either	 man	 is	 enough	 unto	 himself	 the	 first	 kind	 of	 religion
creates	 a	 lethargy	 and	 the	 second	 kind	 of	 religion	 creates	 ego	my	 sannyasins
have	to	avoid	both	extremes	i	am	teaching	a	totally	new	vision	a	vision	in	which
your	effort	is	basically	needed	but	it	is	not	enough
it	takes	you	to	ninety-nine	point	nine	degrees	it	is	very	essential
without	it	that	point	one	degree	won't	happen	but	it	takes	you	only	up	to	that	then
you	have	to	wait,	trust,	relax,	hope,	pray	that	point	one	degree	happens	through
prayer	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	happens	through	meditation	point	one	per
cent	happens	through	prayer	and	then	religion	has	a	totality	only	the	person	who
has	experienced	bliss	can	be	a	helper	of	others
otherwise	 alexes	 tend	 to	 become	 alexanders	 rather	 than	 helping	mankind	 they
start	destroying	mankind	a	miserable	person
with	all	the	good	intentions	in	the	world	cannot	help	anybody
we	can	give	only	that	which	we	have	already	got	helping	somebody	means
you	 have	 got	 a	 nourishing	 energy	 in	 you	 a	 benevolent,	 compassionate	 love	 in
you	that	you	are	radiating	bliss	that	your	presence	is	a	healing	force	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
only	then	can	you	help
otherwise	you	will	become	a	do-gooder	and	they	are
the	most	dangerous	people	in	the	world	the	most	mischievous
humanity	 has	 suffered	 much	 from	 the	 do-gooders	 missionaries,	 reformists,
public	servants	these	are	the	enemies
and	 i	 don't	 suspect	 their	 intentions	 their	 intentions	 are	 good,	 but	 they	 are	 not
good	it	is	like	darkness	trying	to	enlighten	people	it	is	like	a	dead	man	trying	to
give	life	 to	others	 it	 is	 like	an	unlit	 lamp	gathering	people	around	itself	so	that
they	can	be	enkindled	it	is	absolutely,	fundamentally	wrong	hence	i	don't	teach
public	 service	 and	 i	 don't	 teach	 you	 to	 become	 missionaries	 reformists,	 great
servants	of	the	people	i	teach	only	one	thing
be	blissful
then	everything	else	follows	of	 its	own	accord	a	blissful	person	cannot	contain
his	bliss	that	is	not	possible	in	the	very	nature	of	things	a	blissful	person
intrinsically	radiates	his	source	of	joy	just	as	light	radiates	rays	and	the	flowers
radiate	their	perfume	the	blissful	person	radiates	compassion,	 love,	benediction
hence	the	first	duty	is	not	towards	anybody	else	but	towards	yourself
help	yourself
remember	 the	 ancient	 proverb	 physician,	 first	 heal	 thyself	 and	 then	 you	 can
become	 a	 healing	 force	 and	 without	 any	 effort,	 without	 any	 ego	 simply,
naturally,	spontaneously	so	 learn	 to	dance,	sing,	celebrate	 learn	 to	enjoy	 life	 in
its	multi-dimensionality	 and	 that	will	make	you	 an	 alex	 and	prevent	 you	 from
becoming	an	alexander	god	is	not	a	separate	entity	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
god	 is	not	 somewhere	outside	you	god	 is	your	 interiority,	your	 innermost	core
hence	the	search	is	not	for	a	god	somewhere	else	god	is	nothing	but	a	name	for
your	own	centre	and	the	search	for	god
is	nothing	but	a	self-discovery	and	 the	moment	you	discover	yourself	you	also
discover	blissfulness	because	that	is	the	nature	of	the	self	so	both	things	happen
simultaneously	they	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin	either	meditate	and	discover
your	innermost	core	that	is	one	way
or	dance	and	sing	to	abandonment	lose	yourself	in	joy
so	totally	that	you	are	no	more	there	only	the	dance	is,	the	song	is	that	is	another
way	of	discovering	you	will	discover	 the	 same	coin	but	 from	different	aspects
buuddha	 discovered	 through	meditation	meera	 discovered	 through	 dance	 these
are	 the	 two	 fundamental	 roots	 because	 these	 are	 the	 two	 sides	 of	 your	 inner
being	and	one	is	as	valid	as	the	other	i	have	no	special	preference	for	either	so	i
leave	my	sannyasins	 to	choose	 it	 is	not	very	difficult	 to	 choose	either	one	has
just	to	ponder	over	one's	likings	if	you	love	silence
if	you	love	aloneness
if	you	love	just	to	be	within	yourself	if	you	want	and	desire	to	forget	the	whole
and	all	its	worries
if	you	feel	 the	world	 is	 too	much	with	you	 then	meditation	 is	your	way	 if	you
enjoy	 people,	 relationship,	 love	 company,	 friends,	music,	 dance,	 celebration	 if
you	enjoy	the	vast	universe	around	you	and	it	makes	you	rejoice;	it	is	not	tiring	it
is	not	exhausting,	but	rejuvenatinq	then	bliss	is	your	way
and	each	person	has	 to	decide	 for	himself	 i	don't	 impose	anything	on	anybody
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
i	simply	give	you	the	whole	perspective	so	you	can	choose
and	both	are	valid	means
one	is	not	higher	than	the	other	both	reach	the	same	goal
so	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 individual	 liking	 before	 one	 starts	 the	 journey	 one
should	 decide	which	 is	 one's	 way	 because	 sometimes	 it	 can	 happen	 in	 fact	 it
happens	many	 times	 it	 happens	more	 often	 than	 it	 should	 happen	 that	 people
choose	 the	opposite	because	 the	opposite	has	a	certain	attraction	 it	 is	 just	 as	 a
man	 is	 attracted	 towards	 a	 woman	 a	 woman	 is	 attracted	 towards	 a	 man	 the
negative	 and	 the	 positive	 electric	 poles	 are	 attracted	 towards	 each	 other	 the
opposite	has	a	certain	attraction	beware	of	that
because	if	you	choose	the	opposite	you	will	be	in	trouble,	you	will	never	be	at
ease	so	rather	than	looking
at	the	attraction	of	the	opposite	look	at	your	own	liking
your	own	nature	your	own	functioning	watch	yourself
what	is	it	that	gives	you	more	juice?
that	should	be	the	determining	factor	the	decisive	factor
that	is	the	only	criterion	and	once	you	have	taken	a	right	step	the	journey	is	half-
complete	because	the	first	step	is	also	the	last	step	in	india	we	have	one	thousand
names	for	god	there	is	a	whole	scripture,	vishnushastranam	devoted	only	to	the
names	of	god	nothing	else	is	written	in	it	only	one	thousand	names
madhav	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	of	all	those	names
it	means	the	sweet	one
it	is	a	very	different	vision	than	that	of	the	jewish	god	the	jewish	god	says	i	am	a
very	jealous	god	remember,	i	am	not	nice,	i	am	not	your	uncle	a	very	stern	father
this	is	not	a	right	concept	of	god,	a	jealous	god?
god	and	jealousy	cannot	go	together	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
jealousy	is	perfectly	okay	for	 the	devil	and	god	saying	i	am	not	nice	 then	who
can	be	nice?
and	god	saying	i	am	not	your	uncle	what	does	he	mean?
he	means	 i	am	not	 the	 loving	one	 i	am	not	 the	compassionate	one	be	afraid	of
me,	i	am	cruel,	i	am	hard,	i	am	violent	it	is	not	accidental
that	because	of	this	judaic	concept	of	god	all	the	religions
islam,	christianity	and	their	sub-sects	have	always	murdered	each	other	so	much
bloodshed	 has	 been	 done	 by	 the	 christians	 and	 mohammedans	 that	 it	 seems
absolutely	unbelievable	that	in	the	name	of	religion	there	is	so	much	hatred	but	if
god	is	a	jealous	god,	if	god	himself	is	not	nice	then	how	can	the	representatives
of	god	be	nice?
then	how	can	the	pope	be	nice?
he	may	pretend	but	all	those	pretensions	are	of	no	use	in	reality
they	will	talk	about	love	and	they	will	teach	hatred	they	will	preach	love
and	they	will	kill	in	the	name	of	love	madhav	is	a	far	more	sophisticated	vision
of	god	the	sweet	one
you	can	see	the	difference	jesus	was	worshipped	by	the	christians	not	because	he
was	a	loving	person	but	because	he	was	crucified	hence	the	cross	has	become	the
symbol	not	a	rose	flower
that	would	have	 represented	 jesus	more	 accurately	 and	you	 see	krishna	with	 a
flute	 standing	 in	a	dancing	pose	with	peacock	 feathers	 in	his	crown	with	bells
tingling	 around	 his	 waist	 with	 long	 hair	 --	 the	 original	 hippie	 it	 is	 a	 totally
different	vision	of	god	madhav	is	one	of	the	names	of	krishna	the	sweet	one
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	 sings,	 he	 plays	 on	 his	 flute,	 he	 gathers	 people	 and	 they	 dance	 and	 they
celebrate	it	is	a	totally	different	kind	of	world	a	different	dimension
even	 hindus	 have	 forgotten	 all	 about	 it	 they	 have	 been	 contaminated	 by
christians	 and	mohammedans	 they	 have	 forgotten	 their	 own	 vision	 that's	 why
they	 are	 against	me	what	 i	 am	doing	here	 is	 really	giving	people	 songs	 again,
dances	providing	 flutes	which	have	disappeared	changing	crosses	 into	 flutes	 --
that's	my	work	and	of	course	crosses	can	be	made	into	flutes	it	is	the	same	wood
--	why	make	crosses?
my	only	desire	is	that	we	are	able	to	transform	all	the	crosses	of	the	world	into
flutes	and	that	every	church
starts	 singing,	 dancing,	 swinging	 and	 every	 church	 loses	 its	 seriousness	 that
jealous	god	has	to	be	said	goodbye	to	forever	we	have	to	create	a	new	kind	of
religiousness	 of	 sweetness,	 of	 love,	 of	 friendship,	 of	 joy	 so	 my	 message	 is
contained	in	the	word	bliss	because	it	is	bliss	that	will	make	you	sweet	not	only
you
but	it	will	spread	sweetness	all	around	you	be	blissful	and	you	are	religious	be
blissful	and	you	are	a	sannyasin	the	experience	of	ecstasy
is	 the	only	 truth	worth	 seeking	and	 searching	 for	when	 i	 talk	 about	 the	 truth	 i
don't	talk	in	a	philosophical	way	not	the	way	immanuel	kant	will	talk	about	it	or
bertrand	 russell,	 or	 wittgenstein	 they	 talk	 about	 truth	 as	 a	 concept	 not	 as	 an
experience
they	talk	about	truth	as	a	conclusion	of	the	mind	i	talk	about	truth	as	joy	in	the
heart	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 logic	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 philosophy	 it	 has
something	to	do	with	a	transformation	of	your	innermost	core
when	your	very	being	starts	throbbing,	pulsating	in	tune	with	existence
when	there	is	no	discord	between	you	and	the	whole	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
when	you	are	so	synchronised	with	the	whole	that	you	are	no	more	but	only	the
whole	is	that	is	the	moment
when	truth	has	been	experienced	but	the	taste	of	truth	is	that	of	bliss	when	you
drink	truth	your	whole	being	is	full	of	the	taste	of	bliss	and	ecstasy	and	that	taste
never	leaves	you	it	is	eternal
it	comes,	it	never	goes
it	is	forever
so	i	talk	about	truth
the	way	jesus	talked,	buddha	talked,	lao	t~u	talked	but	not	like	aristotle
not	like	the	long	tradition	of	the	so-called	philosophers	kierkegaard,	sartre,	buber
they	 are	 all	 talking	 about	 it	 philosophically	 it	 is	 like	 a	 hungry	 person
philosophically	 thinking	 about	 food	 he	 can	 go	 on	 thinking	 and	 he	will	 go	 on
dying	because	while	he	is	thinking	he	is	starving	he	may	think	beautiful	thoughts
about	food	he	will	have	tremendous	fantasies	about	food	all	kinds	of	dishes
chinese	and	 japanese	and	 italian	but	 that	 is	not	going	 to	help	what	he	needs	 is
some	real	nourishment	but	it	happens	only	when	you	enter	the	innermost	shrine
of	your	being	and	that	is	the	moment	of	truth	when	you	experience	bliss
it	can	be	very	easily	done	the	way	of	philosophy	is	 long	and	unending	and	the
way	of	mysticism	is	short	if	one	is	courageous	enough	one	can	attain	it	instantly
this	very	moment
the	dimension	of	bliss
is	 the	 dimension	 of	 absolute	 silence	 the	 same	 silence	 that	 prevails	 on	 high
mountains	on	higher	altitudes	on	virgin	peaks	--	undisturbed	bliss
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
is	not	to	be	made	synonymous	only	with	silence	it	is	silent
but	it	is	a	silence	with	a	difference	it	is	a	dancing	silence
it	is	a	singing	silence
it	is	not	dead
and	that	too	you	will	feel	at	the	altitudes	of	the	mountains	the	silence	is	there
but	the	silence	has	a	totally	different	quality	it	is	not	the	silence	of	the	cemetery
when	you	go	to	the	graveyard	there	is	silence	but	something	is	dead	and	stinking
we	can	hide	it
we	 can	 make	 beautiful	 graveyards	 with	 marble,	 with	 trees,	 bushes,	 roses	 but
those	corpses	are	there	howsoever	we	hide	them	they	jump	out	they	show	their
faces
with	all	the	facades	we	cannot	deny	death	death	has	happened
death	prevails	there	in	the	graveyard	there	is	no	song	in	it,	there	is	no	dance	in	it
there	is	no	music,	no	poetry	it	 is	a	negative	kind	of	silence	but	the	silence	that
prevails	on	the	himalayan	peaks	where	snow	never	melts
for	millions	of	years	the	snow	has	never	melted	where	no	footprints	are	left	that
virginity,	that	silence,	that	purity	that	crisp	coolness	is	not	dead;	it	is	very	much
alive	you	can	hear	the	heartbeat	of	it	you	can	hear
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
the	same	happens	within	when	bliss	is	attained	you	are	silent	yet	your	silence	is
a	 song	and	 that	has	 to	be	constantly	 remembered	 if	 silence	alone	happens	 it	 is
not	worth	much	if	song	alone	happens	it	is	not	worth	much	silence	alone	is	dead,
song	 alone	 is	 feverish	when	 silence	 and	 song	meet	 then	 the	 deadness	 and	 the
feverishness	both	disappear
and	there	is	immense	health,	wholeness	i	call	that	wholeness,	holiness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	has	to	be
the	flavour	of	my	sannyasins	their	perfume
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#4
Chapter	title:	None
4	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103045
ShortTitle:	CLAPP04
Audio:
No
Video:
No
the	only	way	to	honour	existence	is	to	rejoice	in	it	no	prayer	can	be	real	honour
because	prayer	is	basically	a	demand	in	fact	deep	down	it	is	a	complaint	you	are
asking	for	something	more	it	is	not	gratitude
it	is	just	the	opposite	of	gratitude	hence,	what	goes	on
in	 the	 churches	 and	 the	 temples	 and	 the	 mosques	 and	 the	 synagogues	 is	 not
honour	for	existence	the	real	honour	can	be	only	one	to	rejoice
in	existence's	absolute	ordinariness	in	the	small	things
because	 there	 are	 no	 great	 things	 eating,	 drinking,	 sleeping,	 walking,	 sitting
looking	at	the	stars	or	at	the	trees	just	small	things
life	 consists	 of	 all	 these	 small	 things	 but	 if	 you	 know	how	 to	 rejoice	 then	 the
ordinary	becomes	extraordinary	then	you	know	the	magic	of	transformation	then
the	mundane	is	no	more	mundane	it	becomes	sacred
and	to	make	the	mundane	sacred	is	the	whole	philosophy	of	sannyas	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
there	 is	 only	 one	 real	 marriage	 and	 that	 is	 marriage	 to	 bliss	 in	 fact	 all	 other
marriages	are	indirect	ways	of	reaching	bliss	but	when	there	is	a	direct	route	why
unnecessarily	go	by	an	indirect	route?
and	the	experience	of	thousands	of	years	is	that	the	people	who	go	through	the
indirect	never	reach
there	are	a	thousand	and	one	obstacles	they	get	distracted
they	search	for	bliss	but	they	attain	only	misery	they	hope	for	heaven	but	what
they	gain	is	only	hell	existence	has	to	be	approached	directly	not	via	anything,
no	 mediator	 is	 needed	 and	 the	 direct	 approach	 to	 existence	 is	 what	 i	 call
meditation
without	any	mediator
without	anybody
standing	 between	 you	 and	 existence	 when	 you	 encounter	 existence	 in	 its
tremendous	beauty
bliss	starts	showering	and	it	goes	on	showering	it	knows	no	end
there	is	only	one	marriage	worthwhile	and	that	is	being	wedded	to	bliss	directly
sannyas	 can	be	defined	 as	 a	marriage	 to	bliss	 avoiding	 all	 other	 husbands	 and
wives	and	when	you	have	avoided	all	in	between	the	philosophies,	the	religions,
the	dogmas	it	is	so	close
that	 there	 is	not	even	a	single	 inch's	difference	 the	difference	 is	created	by	 the
indirect	 approach	 the	 distance	 is	 created	 by	 people	who	 are	 standing	 between
you	 and	 the	whole	 there	 is	 no	 need	 for	 anybody	 no	messenger,	 no	 prophet	 is
needed	god	is	yours
existence	 is	 yours	 as	 much	 as	 anybody	 else's	 one	 should	 take	 an	 immediate
plunge	yes
one	hesitates	a	little	before	one	plunges	into	the	ultimate	depths	of	life	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	 hesitation	 is	 natural	 but	 one	has	 to	put	 that	 hesitation	 aside	one	has	 to	be
courageous
and	it	is	a	single	moment's	courage	that	does	the	magic
it	is	just	like	jumping	into	cold	water	if	you	go	on	standing	on	the	bank	you	can
go	on	standing	for	lives	it	is	only	a	question
of	a	single	moment	of	courage	and	risk	throw	off	your	clothes	and	jump	in	yes	it
is	 cold...	 but	 only	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 then	 it	 has	 tremendous	 beauty	 and
tremendous	freshness
aliveness
the	false	aristocrat	is	an	aristocrat	because	of	birth	which	is	not	much,	which	has
no	significance	birth	is	the	same
whether	you	are	born	in	an	emperor's	home	or	in	a	beggar's	home
the	womb	is	the	same
the	queen's	womb	or	the	beggar	woman's	womb	it	makes	no	difference	at	all	the
real	 aristocracy	comes	 from	a	 second	birth	 that	 is	 the	meaning	of	 sujato	when
you	become	blissful
when	you	become	silent
when	you	become	loving
when	you	become	aware
when	a	 second	birth	happens	which	 is	 the	birth	of	your	consciousness	of	your
real	being
not	of	 the	body,	but	of	 the	being	and	 then	one	has	a	certain	aristocracy	such	a
person	may	not	have	anything	he	may	be	a	beggar
but	you	will	see	the	grace	of	the	emperor	in	him	you	will	see	him	surrounded	by
a	subtle	aura	of	the	beyond	he	is	really	born
others	are	only	half-born
they	are	in	a	kind	of	limbo.	physically	born	but	psychologically	still	waiting	for
birth	socrates	says,	i	am	a	midwife	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	s	exactly	the	function	of	a	master	to	help	you	attain	the	second	birth	in	india,
when	a	person	becomes	awakened	we	call	him	 twice-born,	dwija	one	who	has
been	born	again	the	first	birth
brings	you	out	of	the	physical	womb	the	second	birth
brings	you	out	of	 the	psychological	womb	 the	 first	birth	brings	you	out	of	 the
physical	womb	into	the	psychological
it	creates	mind
the	 second	 birth	 takes	 you	 out	 of	 the	 psychological	 and	 brings	 you	 to	 the
spiritual	it	gives	you	being
and	being	is	immortality,	deathlessness	the	only	criterion
that	the	second	birth	has	happened	is	total	blissfulness
in	all	situations	unaffected,	untouched	by	whatsoever	happens	around	failure	or
success,	 richness	 or	 poverty	 youth	 or	 old	 age,	 life	 or	 death	 the	 wheel	 of	 the
opposites	 goes	 on	 moving	 but	 the	 man	 who	 knows	 bliss	 remains	 centred,
unmoved
he	is	the	unmoving	centre	of	a	moving	wheel	the	centre	of	the	cyclone
there	 are	 many	 kinds	 of	 beauties	 there	 is	 the	 physical	 beauty	 which	 is	 only
momentary
it	may	be	there	today	and	tomorrow	it	is	gone	in	fact	it	is	bound	to
in	 fact	 it	 is	 already	 going	 down	 the	 drain	 slipping	 out	 of	 your	 hands	 every
moment	the	second	layer	of	beauty	is	psychological	it	is	of	intellect,	of	aesthetic
sensibility	the	man	who	has	a	musical	ear	or	the	man	who	has	the	sensitivity	of	a
painter	in	his	eyes
his	beauty	is	far	deeper	than	the	physical	sometimes	it	happens
that	the	person	may	be	physiologically	ugly	for	example
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
socrates	 was	 very	 ugly,	 snub-nosed	 but	 psychologically,	 a	 man	 of	 immense
beauty	if	one	saw	him	from	far	away	he	was	repulsive	but	if	one	came	in	close
contact	then	one	would	enter
into	 a	 totally	 different	 kind	 of	 man	 because	 he	 had	 such	 a	 keen	 intelligence
rarely	surpassed
and	such	sensibility
such	 aesthetic	 transparency	 that	 once	 you	 looked	 into	 his	 psyche	 you	 would
completely	forget	his	body	the	same	seems	to	be	true	about	jesus	physiologically
he	was	not	beautiful	but	psychologically	one	of	the	most	beautiful	men	who	has
ever	walked	on	the	earth	but	there	is	still	a	third	the	ultimate	layer	of	beauty	that
is	of	being,	is	absolutely	of	your	interiority	to	understand	that
seeing	 the	 body	 is	 not	 enough	 experiencing	 the	 person's	 intelligence	 and
sensitivity	is	not	enough
for	that	only	a	disciple
one	 who	 is	 absolutely	 surrendered	 open,	 vulnerable,	 is	 needed	 that's	 what
sannyas	is	all	about	being	in	tune	with	the	master	at	the	deepest	level	of	beauty
by-passing	the	physiological,	the	psychological	just	going	like	an	arrow
not	being	stuck
at	the	physiological	or	the	psychological	but	hitting	deep	down
into	the	very	core	of	the	master	only	then	do	you	know	the	ultimate	beauty	and
there	resides	bliss
the	physiological	beauty	may	give	you	pleasure	the	psychological	can	give	you
happiness	 but	 only	 the	 spiritual	 can	 give	 you	 bliss	 it	 opens	 the	 doors	 of	 the
kingdom	of	bliss	so	one	can	do	two	things
either	one	discovers	one's	being	and	in	that	very	discovery	one	becomes	blissful
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
or	 one	 starts	 becoming	 blissful	 and	 in	 becoming	 blissful	 one	 discovers	 one's
being	both	are	the	same
different	 aspects	 of	 the	 same	 phenomenon	 if	 you	want	 to	 enter	 from	 the	 first
door	then	meditate	then	be	silent
and	 drown	 yourself	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 down	 to	 the	 very	 rock-bottom	 of	 your
being	there	you	will	find	yourself	and	bliss
as	a	shadow
or,	 if	 that	 is	 not	 your	 liking	 the	 feminine	 mind	 particularly	 does	 not	 like
meditation	very	much	it	is	natural
that's	 why	 there	 have	 been	 very	 few	 women	 buddhas	 not	 that	 there	 is	 any
intrinsic	obstruction	for	a	woman	to	become	a	buddha	the	only	reason	has	been
that	all	the	male	buddhas	have	been	talking	about	meditation	and	meditation
does	not	have	much	appeal	for	the	woman	she	needs	a	totally	different	approach
she	will	be	more	interested	in	blissfulness	in	something	orgasmic
in	something	which	is	closer	to	dance,	music,	poetry	in	something	to	which
she	can	abandon	herself	totally	not	in	something
which	 is	 a	 question	 of	 self-remembering	 meditation	 means	 self-remembering
and	 blissfulness	 means	 forgetting	 the	 self	 totally	 when	 you	 begin	 they	 look
opposite	remembering	and	forgetting	are	certainly	opposites	but	when	you	reach
closer	to	your	being	they	become	one
remembering	the	self	brings	you	to	the	real	self	the	unreal	self	is	dropped	on	the
way	 and	 in	 forgetting	 the	 self	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 you	 start	 dropping	 the
false	self	a	moment	comes	when	the	false	self	is	abandoned	and	the	real	arises	of
its	own	accord	my	effort	here	is	to	create	a	balance	which	has	been	lacking	up	to
now	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
religion	has	been	dominated	too	much	by	the	male	mind
it	has	been	a	calamity
the	woman	has	been	unnecessarily	deprived	it	is	very	difficult	to	find	women	of
the	calibre	of	buddha
zarathustra,	lao	tzu
difficult	for	the	simple	reason	that	the	method	they	chose	was	male-oriented	so	i
am	 creating	 a	 synthesis	 here	 those	 who	 are	 male-oriented	 a	 few	 women	 are
male-oriented	 it	 is	 not	 necessarily	 so	 that	 no	 woman	 will	 be	 interested	 in
meditation	there	are	a	few	women
who	will	reach	through	meditation	and	there	are	a	few	men
who	will	reach	through	blissfulness	but	those	are	exceptions
and	exceptions	cannot	be	counted	they	only	prove	the	rule
so	for	you
my	suggestion	is	be	more	blissful	dance,	sing,	be	a	drunkard	and	then	it	will	be
easier	once	the	door	opens	for	the	drunken	people	then	thousands	of	women	who
have	 been	 waiting	 for	 millions	 of	 years	 to	 become	 buddhas	 and	 they	 are	 all
arriving	here	this	may	be	the	first	place	where	thousands	of	women	will	become
buddhas	i	count	courage
as	being	the	most	significant	religious	quality	although	in	the	past
just	the	opposite	has	been	the	case	cowards,	only	cowards
out	of	fear,	afraid	of	death	hell,	punishment,	judgement	day	have	been	religious
out	 of	 fear	 they	were	 praying	doing	 all	 kinds	 of	 stupid	 rituals,	 following	utter
fools	but	 their	orientation	was	such	that	 they	could	not	be	rebellious	they	were
afraid	of	rebellion,	they	had	to	be	obedient	obedience	has	been	taught	to	them	as
the	most	fundamental	religious	quality	it	is	not
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	may	be	a	quality	 in	an	army	but	 it	 is	not	a	quality	of	a	 religious	man	 it	 is	a
subtle	method	of	regimentation	the	religious	person
has	 to	 be	 courageous	 enough	 to	 explore	 because	 truth	 cannot	 be	 given	 by	 the
scriptures	it	is	untransferrable
bliss	cannot	be	transmitted	to	you	by	somebody	else
you	have	 to	 seek	and	 search	and	you	have	 to	 travel	 alone	and	you	have	 to	go
onto	 untravelled	 paths	 because	 there	 are	 not	 asphalt	 ways	 no	 superhighways
where	crowds	can	go	and	buses	can	go	and	tourists	can	go	one	has	to	go	alone
and	one	has	to	create	one's	path	oneself	by	walking	on	it
the	path	is	not	already	there,	it	is	not	readymade	buddha	is	reported	to	have	said
that	 the	 way	 of	 the	 true	 seeker	 is	 like	 a	 bird	 flying	 in	 the	 sky	 it	 leaves	 no
footprints
so	no	other	bird	 can	 follow	 it	 because	 there	 are	no	 footprints	 left	 there	 are	no
footprints	 at	 all	 existence	 always	 remains	 the	 same	 mystery	 many	 have
experienced	it
but	nobody	has	been	able	to	demystify	it	nobody	will	ever	be	able	to	demystify	it
because	when	you	experience	it,	it	is	inexpressible	you	cannot	put	it	into	words,
into	theories	and	if	one	is	courageous
bliss	 starts	 from	 the	 very	 beginning	 just	 the	 idea	 that	 you	 are	 going	 into	 the
exploration	of	the	unknown	is	enough	to	give	the	heart	a	new	beat
a	fresh	breeze,	a	new	joy
a	rebirth,	a	resurrection
truth,	bliss,	freedom,	godliness,	love	these	are	all	aspects	of	one	experience	and
that	experience	is	available	only	to	the	courageous,	to	the	rebellious	be	a	rebel
sannyas	is	a	rebellion
a	rebellion	against	all	tradition	a	rebellion	against	all	the	rotten	past	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	rebellion	against	all	that	is	dead	and	a	search	for	the	living	a	search	which	will
need
many	many	risks	to	be	taken	adventures	to	be	accepted
challenges	to	be	encountered	but	it	is	a	joy
it	is	bliss	all	the	way	from	the	beginning	to	the	end	one	just	has	to	learn	the	taste
of	exploration	and	then
each	moment	becomes	more	and	more	alive	more	and	more	festive
more	and	more	celebrating
and	the	ultimate	celebration	is	when	you	have	found
that	you	are	bliss
that	bliss	is	not	something	outside	you	that	you	are	god
that	 god	 is	 not	 something	 outside	 you	 that	 you	 are	 freedom,	 that	 you	 are
liberation	in	that	moment	the	ultimate	dance	happens	it	simply	explodes
in	that	explosion	you	are	lost	and	only	that	which	is	truth	remains	that	truth	is	the
longing	of	every	heart	man	has	been	told	again	and	again	to	be	perfect	that	is	a
wrong	beginning
to	 tell	 somebody	 to	 be	 perfect	 is	 to	 drive	 him	 nuts	 that's	 why	 the	 whole	 of
humanity	is	almost	living	in	a	madhouse	perfection	is	not	something	that	one	can
achieve	 it	 is	 a	 by-product	 of	 blissfulness	 remember	 the	 word	 by-product	 you
cannot	achieve	it	directly	it	comes	as	a	shadow	of	blissfulness	so	i	don't	say	to
you	to	be	perfect	i	say	to	you	to	be	blissful	and	perfection	will	follow	of	its	own
accord	in	its	own	time
and	who	cares	for	perfection?
if	you	have	a	need
it	is	only	the	miserable	person	who	cares	for	perfection
the	blissful	person	has	no	need	for	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	this	is	one	of	the	fundamental	laws	of	life	if	you	are	in	need	you	will	not	get
it	existence	functions
almost	on	the	same	lines	as	banking	the	bank	is	not	going	to	give	to	you	if	you
don't	have	any	need	the	bank	is	after	you	existence	is	always	willing	to	give	to
you	if	you	don't	need
the	needy	person	is	a	beggar	and	existence	does	not	like	beggars	the	person	who
is	blissful	is	an	emperor	and	existence	loves	emperors	so	be	blissful,	rejoice
and	don	t	bother	about	perfection	it	comes
it	inevitably	comes
and	when	it	comes	on	its	own	it	has	a	tremendous	beauty	my	only	discipline	is	to
be	blissful	no	other	discipline	is	needed	no	moral	commandments
no	shoulds,	should-nots
just	a	simple	message	to	be	blissful	in	whatsoever	you	can	be,	be	blissful	and	if
one	can	imbibe	the	spirit	of	bliss	then	many	things	follow
a	blissful	person	is	bound	to	be	loving	you	need	not	tell	him	love	thy	neighbour
as	 thyself	 you	 need	 not	 tell	 him	 love	 thy	 enemy	 as	 thyself	 because	 when
somebody
tries	to	love	their	neighbour	that	love	is	false,	the	very	effort	makes	it	false	when
one	 tries	 to	 love	 one's	 enemy	 one	 knows	 perfectly	 that	 he	 is	 the	 enemy
otherwise,	why	should	one	try	to	love	him?
one	knows	he	is	the	enemy	but	one	has	to	try	because	jesus	says	so
and	 that	 is	 the	 only	way	 to	 reach	 paradise	 so	 it	 has	 to	 be	 done	 somehow	one
pretends,	one	creates	a	pseudo	kind	of	love	and	the	pseudo	kind	of	love	is	very
saccharin	It	is	not	even	sugar,	it	is	not	even	sweet	it	is	saccharin,	it	tastes	a	little
bitter	and	because	it	is	false
the	other	person	will	immediately	see	it	as	false	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	will	 feel	 humiliated,	 insulted	 friedrich	 nietzsche	 has	 said,	 and	 said	 rightly
that	jesus	is	not	right	when	he	says	if	somebody	hits	you	on	one	of	your	cheeks
give	him	the	other	too
and	i	agree	with	nietzsche	far	more	in	that	matter
because	he	says
this	is	very	insulting	to	the	other	person	it	is	humiliating
you	are	trying	to	be	superior	and	higher	you	are	trying	to	be	superhuman	you	are
reducing	the	other	person	to	a	cockroach	he	is	also	a	man,	he	needs	equality	you
are	trying	to	be	superior	i	agree	with	nietzsche
if	somebody	hits	you	on	one	cheek	give	him	a	good	hit	on	the	other	immediately
that	proves	equality
it	does	not	give	you	the	idea	of	holier-than-thou	of	look,	you	are	hitting	me	and	i
am	giving	you	my	other	cheek	you	are	just	an	ordinary	human	being	i	am	a	saint,
a	sage
that	is	very	egoistic
but	 this	 is	 bound	 to	 happen	 if	 you	 try	 to	 cultivate	 qualities	 love,	 compassion,
mercy
when	 cultivated	 become	 bogus,	 false,	 facades	 they	 should	 come	 out	 of	 your
blissfulness	yes,	if	you	are	so	blissful	that	you	enjoyed	one	hit	on	the	cheek	give
him	the	other	also
not	 because	 you	 are	 being	 superior	 but	 because	 you	 enjoyed	 it	 that's	 a	 totally
different	 approach	 you	 are	 telling	 him	 please,	 one	more	 it	 brought	me	 to	my
senses	i	loved	it	it	made	me	a	little	awakened	you	will	be	obliged	to	the	person
because	he	has	hit	you
you	will	not	be	condescending	you	will	not	be	trying	in	any	way	to	be	superior	if
you	are	full	of	bliss,	you	will	share	your	bliss	that	is	natural
but	you	will	not	be	serving	people	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	will	be	sharing
service	is	ugly,	sharing	is	beautiful	when	you	serve	somebody	you	hurt	him	you
humiliate	him
all	christian	missionaries	are	humiliating	they	are	searching	for	the	cripples,	for
the	widows	what	kind	of	people	are	these	J
if	 they	don't	 find	any	widows	or	any	orphans	or	any	cripples	 they	will	be	at	a
loss
what	to	do?
how	to	reach	god?
the	whole	ladder	has	disappeared	they	are	stepping	on	these	people's	heads	they
are	making	their	way	to	god	these	are	stepping	stones,	not	people	a	man	of	bliss
shares
it	is	not	a	question
of	whether	the	person	needs	it	or	not	he	simply	shares	because	he	has	too	much
out	 of	 abundance	 he	 shares	 hence	 my	 only	 discipline	 is	 be	 blissful	 and
everything	else	 follows	 it	man	has	 tried	 in	many	ways	 to	be	silent	because	 the
world	is	too	noisy	it	is	too	much,	it	is	very	loud	it	creates	great	tension,	anxiety,
anguish	hence	a	natural	idea	arises	in	the	mind	of	man	about	how	to	get	rid	of	it
how	to	hide	yourself	in	some	sanctuary	monastery,	mountain,	in	a	desert	where
nobody	disturbs	you
where	 you	 are	 left	 alone	 to	 yourself	 there	 is	 great	 need	 to	 be	 oneself	 to	 have
one's	own	space
this	is	a	logical	conclusion	because	the	world	is	too	heavy	and	sooner	or	later	a
person	feels	crowded	overcrowded,	crushed,	from	all	sides	suffocated	because	of
this	suffocation	religion	became	an	escape
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	conclusion	is	logical	but	not	real	not	existential
you	can	escape	from	the	world	but	you	cannot	escape	from	yourself	and	the	real
cause	of	noise	is	within	you	not	in	the	world
you	 will	 quarrel	 with	 the	 monks	 in	 the	 monastery	 nuns	 will	 compete	 and	 be
jealous	of	each	other	even	in	the	desert,	sitting	alone	a	crow	will	start	disturbing
you	and	that	will	be	enough,	in	a	desert	that	is	enough	in	the	marketplace
you	 could	 have	 forgotten	 the	 crow	 but	 in	 the	 desert	 a	 single	 crow	 is	 enough
wherever	you	go
you	will	carry	your	mind,	your	reactions	and	if	there	is	nothing	to	worry	about
you	will	start	worrying	about	nothing	what	am	i	doing	here?
is	it	right	to	be	here?
is	it	good	to	sit	alone	in	the	desert	when	the	whole	world	is	suffering?
this	is	escapism
and	perhaps	i	am	missing	something	who	knows?
life	 is	a	great	opportunity	and	i	am	sitting	in	 the	desert	doing	nothing	you	will
become	disturbed	 about	 it	 you	will	 create	 new	kinds	 of	 problems	 for	 yourself
mind	grows	problems	just	like	trees	grow	leaves	the	conclusion	is	logical	but	not
real	not	of	real	help
so	i	don't	suggest	escapism,	i	suggest	an	alchemy	to	transform	your	inner	being
into	a	song	your	inner	noise	into	a	song	because	a	song
is	nothing	but	a	transformation	of	noise	what	is	music	after	all?
just	noise	arranged	in	a	beautiful	way	the	same	orchestra	can	drive	you	crazy	just
put	together	thirty	crazy	musicians	who	are	not	in	tune	with	each	other	at	all	and
that	will	be	enough
the	same	orchestra,	the	same	instruments	can	create	something	celestial	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
something	of	the	beyond
it	is	the	same	noise
just	a	little	different	arrangement	escape	is	not	needed
but	a	different	alchemy	is	needed	so	i	don't	say	leave	the	world	i	say	change	your
attitude,	your	approach	rather	than	searching
for	an	empty	space	somewhere	search	for	a	blissful	song	within	create	it
all	that	is	needed	is	available	it	just	has	to	be	put	in	the	right	combination	every
ingredient	is	already	given	you	just	have	to	mix	it
mix	it	artfully.	intelligently	and	once	you	have	created
the	song	of	bliss	within	you	you	will	be	surprised	that	 the	whole	world	has	no
more	 difficulties	 for	 you	you	go	 singing	 in	 the	marketplace	 you	 can	 sit	 in	 the
madhouse	with	absolute	 joy	 in	 fact	you	can	enjoy	 the	mad	people	 i	have	been
doing	that	for	my	whole	life	what	do	you	think	i	am	doing	right	now?
collecting	 all	 kinds	of	 crazies,	 cuckoos	 and	enjoying	 it,	 really	 enjoying	 it	 they
are	beautiful	people
somebody	 just	 needs	 to	 know	 how	 to	 enjoy	 them	 somebody	 needs	 a	 certain
insight	i	used	to	visit	the	madhouses	then	finally	i	dropped	it
because	 i	 saw	 that	 the	 whole	 earth	 is	 a	madhouse	what	 is	 the	 point	 of	 going
behind	walls	 outside	 the	walls	 is	 the	 same	 place	 once	 you	 have	 an	 inner	 tune
then	nothing	disturbs	you
then	 the	 whole	 existence	 becomes	 a	 song	 and	 a	 song	 that	 contains	 silence	 a
silence	that	contains	song	when	song	and	silence	both	meet	together	the	ultimate
is	achieved
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#5
Chapter	title:	None
5	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103055
ShortTitle:	CLAPP05
Audio:
No
Video:
No
every	child	is	born	innocent	and	brings	with	him	a	great	message	of	the	whole
every	child	is	a	messenger	of	good	tidings	every	child	is	a	christ
but	before	he	can	deliver	the	message	we	destroy	it
before	he	can	utter	a	single	word	we	start	stuffing	his	mind	with	our	cunningness
before	his	heart	opens	and	releases	its	fragrance	we	divert	his	energies	from	the
heart	to	the	head	--
and	the	head	is	never	innocent	t	is	always	calculating,	cunning;	it	is	a	cheat	the
heart	 is	 always	 innocent	 hence	 only	 the	 heart	 can	 be	 in	 connection	 with	 the
divine	not	the	head
the	head	is	good	in	the	marketplace	but	not	in	the	temple
but	 people	who	 are	 full	 of	 the	 head	 are	 dominating	 the	 temples	 also	man	 has
completely	forgotten	his	heart	his	heartfulness,	his	innocence,	his	purity	and	the
message	that	he	had	come	to	deliver	my	effort	here
is	to	give	you	again	the	same	innocence	that	you	had	before	society	sabotaged	it
before	the	society	entered	you	and	disrupted	your	whole	inner	being	and	nature
sannyas	is	not	an	effort	to	achieve	some	goal	on	the	contrary
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	a	re-entry	into	the	source	the	white	lily
has	a	certain	beauty,	a	certain	grace	which	is	unique
because	the	white	lily	is	very	poor	in	every	way	it	is	not	as	rich	as	the	rose	not	as
rich	as	the	lotus
these	 are	 like	 kings	 and	 queens	 the	 white	 lily	 is	 very	 ordinary	 but	 In	 its
ordinariness	it	has	something	its	very	ordinariness,	its	simplicity	its	humbleness,
its	nobodiness	is	its	source	of	grace
it	is	unpretentious,	it	has	no	ego	the	rose	may	have	an	ego	--	it	can	afford	it	the
white	lily	is	just	a	nothingness	and	whenever	one	is	in	a	nothingness	grace	arises
grace	is	the	by-product	of	being	nobody	of	being	just	ordinary
i	exalt	ordinariness
because	it	 is	 the	source	of	all	 that	 is	really	beautiful,	graceful,	divine	once	you
become	 nobody	 you	 become	 innocent	 the	 very	 effort	 to	 be	 somebody	 makes
people	cunning	and	political	the	moment	you	drop	the	ambition	to	be	somebody
then	 all	 foolishness,	 then	 all	 idiocy	 then	 all	 egoistic	 desires	 are	 dropped
simultaneously	and	suddenly	there	is	an	explosion	of	grace	and	that	grace	has	to
be	the	flavour	of	my	sannyasins
aristocracy	can	be	defined	in	two	ways	one	is	the	mundane	aristocracy	which	is
confined	to	a	noble	birth	it	is	not	of	much	value
it	has	no	spiritual	significance	but	aristocracy	can	also	be	defined	as	a	spiritual
birth,	a	second	birth	the	first	birth	is	physiological	--
aristocratic	or	not,	it	is	the	same	the	second	birth	happens	only	to	those	who	are
really	innocent	and	who	prepare	for	innocence	who	are	ready	to	receive	the	gift
from	the	beyond	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
who	are	receptive
that's	what	i	mean	by	innocence	a	preparation
the	first	aristocracy	 is	cunning	 it	 is	part	of	a	 long	exploitation	one	 is	born	 in	a
royal	family	--
that	 simply	means	one	 is	born	 in	a	 family	of	murderers,	dacoits,	 criminals	 the
longer	the	history	of	the	family	the	bigger	is	their	crime
for	 thousands	 of	 years	 they	 have	 exploited	 people	 oppressed	 people,	 tortured
people	their	aristocracy	is	full	of	blood,	it	is	ugly	it	is	nothing	to	brag	about	it	is
something	 to	 be	 ashamed	 about	 but	when	 you	 are	 born	 anew	 through	 silence,
innocence	awareness,	meditativeness
when	you	give	birth	to	yourself	--
which	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	past	or	your	parents	or	history	when	it	is	your
individual	 creativity,	 receptivity	 when	 you	 are	 individually	 involved	 with
existence	when	you	respond	to	existence	without	any	ambition,	desire,	demand
when	you	are	open,	available,	like	a	mirror	when	in	your	innocence
existence	starts	reflecting	itself	as	it	is	without	any	distortion
you	are	born	anew
that	is	real	aristocracy
a	sannyasin	has	to	be	an	aristocrat	but	with	my	meaning
the	 word	 innocent	 is	 very	 significant	 to	 me	 it	 is	 a	 state	 of	 not-knowing	 the
knowledgeable	person	is	not	 innocent	he	cannot	be:	he	already	knows	and	that
very	knowing	gives	him	the	ego	knowledge	is	 the	most	subtle	nourishment	for
the	ego
far	more	than	money,	power,	prestige	because	power	can	be	taken	away	one	day
you	are	a	napoleon	another	day	you	are	a	prisoner	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	power	is	not	something	very	stable	you	cannot	rely	upon	it
one	day	you	are	rich
the	next	day	you	are	just	a	beggar	respectability	can	be	lost	very	easily	because	it
depends	on	other's	opinions	their	opinions	may	change
and	 they	 do	 change	 every	 day	 the	man	who	was	 the	 prime	minister	 of	 russia
before	the	revolution,	kerensky	--
everybody	has	forgotten	about	him	nobody	even	remembers	his	name	he	was	the
most	significant	man	in	russia	before	lenin
then	suddenly	it	were	as	if	he	disappeared	after	fifty	years	it	became	known	that
he	was	a	grocer	in	new	york	and	he	died	as	a	grocer
when	he	died	then	the	world	became	aware	that	kerensky	had	been	alive	for	fifty
years	otherwise	nobody	had	even	taken	any	note	of	where	he	had	gone,	of	what
had	 happened	 to	 him	 but	 knowledge	 is	 far	 more	 subtle	 it	 cannot	 be	 stolen,
nobody	 can	 destroy	 it	 nobody	 ,can	 take	 it	 away	 from	 you	 it	 is	 far	 more
significant	for	the	ego	than	anything	else
hence	the	greatest	problem	in	becoming	innocent	is	the	dropping	of	knowledge
money	can	be	dropped,	power	can	be	dropped	prestige	can	be	dropped
respectability	 can	 be	 renounced	 but	 knowledge	 --	 one	 clings	 to	 it	 i	 have	 seen
people	who	have	renounced	the	world	they	have	gone	to	the	mountains	and	still
they	are	hindus,	mohammedans,	christians	i	asked	them,	you	have	renounced	the
world	 but	 you	 have	 not	 renounced	 the	 knowledge	 that	 the	world	 had	 given	 to
you	what	kind	of	renunciation	is	this?
you	are	still	a	christian?	--
then	how	can	you	say
you	have	renounced	the	world?
you	say	you	have	renounced	your	parents,	your	wife,	your	children	but	you	have
not	renounced	all	the	nonsense	that	they	have	given	to	you	you	are	still	carrying
it	with	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
they	were	not	even	aware	of	the	fact	that	something	of	the	world	goes	on	inside
them	knowledge	is	the	penetration	of	the	world	within	you	and	to	drop	it	is	the
real	 renunciation	 so	 i	 don't	 say	 renounce	 the	 world	 i	 only	 say	 renounce
knowledgeability	 the	 moment	 you	 renounce	 knowlegeability	 you	 are	 again	 a
child
and	to	be	a	child	again	is	to	be	a	sage	a	real	sage,	who	knows	nothing	because	he
knows	nothing	he	is	full	of	wonder	because	he	knows	nothing	his	eyes	are	full	of
awe	because	 he	 knows	 nothing	 everything	 surprises	 him	now	 each	moment	 is
mysterious	and	miraculous	that's	my	way
the	way	of	 innocence,	 the	way	of	not-knowing	 the	way	of	 living	 in	 a	mystery
moment	to	moment	and	one	has	to	remember
that	 knowledge	 accumulates	 every	 day	 it	 is	 like	 dust	 gathering	 on	 the	 mirror
even	in	the	night	when	nothing	is	happening	the	mirror	is	gathering	dust	even	in
the	 night	 when	 nothing	 is	 being	 learned	 your	 mind	 is	 gathering	 dust	 through
dreams,	nightmares,	fantasies	so	one	has	to	be	constantly	cleaning	each	moment
one	has	to	die	to	the	past	so	all	that	has	been	accumulated	up	to	that	moment,	is
dropped	--
again	you	are	fresh,	young,	alive,	childlike,	innocent	and	then	the	whole	world	is
yours	 then	all	 the	 joys	of	 it	are	yours	 then	life	 is	an	eternal	ecstasy	 then	life	 is
poetry,	music	 then	 life	 is	 beauty,	 benediction	 all	 that	 is	 significant	 happens	 in
innocence	the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
the	 eternal	 music	 is	 heard	 when	 there	 is	 nobody	 as	 a	 knower	 when	 there	 is
nobody,	not	even	as	an	observer	when	one	simply	participates	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
when	the	observer	becomes	the	observed	when	you	see	the	rainbow
you	are	not	there	separate	from	it	you	become	it
when	you	see	a	beautiful	sunset	you	are	it	it	is	the	mind	that	divides	when	you
see	the	sky	full	of	stars	it	is	within	you,	you	are	within	it	there	is	no	distinction,
no	demarcation	no	fencing	around	you
it	is	a	dissolution,	a	melting,	a	merging	a	deep	orgasmic	unity
and	that	is	the	very	foundation	of	my	message	the	so-called	saints	i	don't	count
as	 sages	 the	 so-called	 saints	 live	 a	 structured	 life	 according	 to	 certain
prescriptions	of	others	they	are	basically	slaves
they	are	performing	certain	rituals	but	doing	it	efficiently
hence	the	people	who	believe	in	those	rituals	will	call	them	saints
so	a	christian	saint
may	not	be	thought	of	as	a	saint	by	the	hindus	because	their	rituals	differ	their
definitions	differ
for	example,	no	hindu	has	ever	thought	that	saints	should	go	and	serve	the	poor	-
-
that	has	not	been	part	of	their	definition	a	saint	has	to	be	served
he	is	not	to	be	a	servant
a	saint	being	a	servant	 is	sacrilege	 to	 the	hindu	but	 to	 the	christian	 the	saint	 is
one	who	serves	the	poor,	the	down-trodden	there	are	three	hundred	religions	in
the	 world	 and	 three	 hundred	 definitions	 of	 saints	 all	 those	 definitions	 are
manufactured	 according	 to	 certain	 tradition	 certain	 scripture,	 certain	 ideology
and	the	man	who	lives
according	to	such	traditions	ideologies	and	scriptures
is	not	really	a	man
what	to	say	about	his	being	a	saint?	--
he	is	not	even	a	man
he	is	just	a	robot;	he	has	no	guts	the	sage	is	rebellious
he	 is	 always	 outrageous	 to	 the	 traditional	 mind	 no	 tradition	 will	 respect	 him
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	 cannot,	 because	 he	will	 not	 fit	with	 anybody's	 expectations	 and	he	 does	 not
care	either	a	real	sage	lives	in	such	joy	who	bothers	whether	people	respect	you
or	insult	you?
whether	they	crown	you	or	crucify	you?
it	doesn't	matter,	not	in	the	least	a	sage	is	one
who	 lives	according	 to	his	own	 innocent	heart	not	according	 to	anybody	else's
dictates	it	is	an	individual	rebellion	and	only	through	individual	rebellion	do	you
attain	to	the	ultimate	soul	the	ultimate	flowering	of	your	being	be	innocent
that	means	be	without	any	traditional	garbage	and	be	a	rebel
that	means	risk	everything	 to	be	an	 individual	and	 if	one	can	gather	 that	much
courage	then	only	does	something	meaningful	happen	in	life	otherwise	it	is	just	a
long,	long,	slow	suicide	not	life	at	all
it	is	possible	only	for	the	child	to	attain	union	with	the	whole	because	the	child
has	not	yet	grown	a	hard	core	around	himself	he	is	flexible
he	has	not	yet	got	encapsulated	in	an	ego	but	the	way	society	exists,	no	child	can
manage	it	because	the	child	is	helpless	he	depends	on	the	parents
and	the	parents	are	either	christian	hindus,	mohammedans
communists,	fascists	and	what	not	and	they	are	bound	to	stuff	their	nonsense	into
the	mind	of	the	child	the	child	Is	the	most	exploited	person	In	the	world	but	there
is	a	possibility	it	is	the	only	possibility	that	later	on
when	you	become	a	 little	more	 independent	when	you	can	 stand	on	your	own
feet	you	can	discard	all	that	has	been	forced	upon	you	you	can	again	become	a
child	and	that	is	the	beginning	of	sannyas	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
becoming	a	child	again
is	the	greatest	experience	in	life	and	then	the	second	thing	is	very	simple	if	you
can	 discard	 the	 boundaries	 suddenly	 the	 dewdrop	 slips	 into	 the	 ocean	 and
becomes	the	ocean
or	 vice	 versa	 is	 also	 true	 the	 ocean	 slips	 into	 the	 dewdrop	 and	 becomes	 the
dewdrop
that	meeting	is	called	yoga	and	one	who	attains	that	union	is	a	yogi	so	don't	go
for	the	cheap
third-rate	definitions	of	a	yogi	somebody	standing	on	his	head	thinks	he	is	a	yogi
he	is	just	stupid
somebody	distorting	and	contorting	his	body	and	doing	gymnastics
thinks	he	is	doing	yoga
he	is	just	deceiving	himself	by	all	these	gymnastics
one	 cannot	 attain	 to	 the	 ultimate	 union	 the	 only	way	 to	 attain	 to	 that	 union	 is
through	innocence
innocence	 is	 the	 door	 to	 god	 and	 there	 is	 no	 other	 door,	 remember	mind	 can
never	be	contented	that	is	not	its	nature
its	 very	working	 is	 through	 discontent	mind	means	 asking	 for	more	 and	more
and	more	ad	infinitum
the	mind	is	a	beggar
the	mind	is	a	bowl	of	a	beggar	and	not	an	ordinary	bowl	either	it	has	no	bottom
in	it
so	you	go	on	dropping	things	into	it	and	they	go	on	disappearing	and	the	bowl
remains	as	empty	as	ever	but	the	heart	is	an	emperor	because	the	heart	already
contains	 the	 kingdom	 of	 god	within	 it	 it	 never	 asks	 for	more	 --	 it	 cannot	 ask
because	there	is	not	anything	more	possible	than	it	has	already	got
to	know	one's	heart	is	to	become	contented	utterly	contented
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	to	know	the	heart	one	has	to	become	innocent	one	was	born	innocent
hence	one	can	again	become	innocent	it	is	just	a	rediscovery	of	one's	real	nature
it	is	not	something	that	has	to	be	achieved	it	is	not	far	away
it	is	just	inside	us,	covered	with	junk	that	junk	can	be	removed
and	it	is	so	simple	to	remove	it	once	you	recognise	it	as	junk	the	very	recognition
that	it	is	all	rubbish	is	enough	and	you	start	shovelling	it	away	and	the	moment
you	discover	your	innocent	core	you	have	discovered	the	ultimate	treasure	of	life
call	it	god,	nirvana.	enlightenment	but	those	are	all	words
in	fact	it	is	so	vast
that	 it	cannot	be	contained	 in	any	word	at	all	 the	sannyasin	has	 to	make	 just	a
small	 trip	 from	 the	head	 to	 the	heart	 from	 the	artificial	 to	 the	natural	 from	 the
arbitrary	 to	 the	 spontaneous	 from	 the	 social	 to	 the	 individual	 i	 throw	 my
sannyasins	from	their	collective	mind	to	their	individual	core
and	 that	 to	me	 is	 the	 greatest	 revolution	 no	 other	 revolution	 can	 be	 compared
with	it	because	it	is	only	through	this	revolution	that	you	attain
a	transcendental,	ecstatic	existence	that	you	go	beyond	death
that	you	go	beyond	time
that	for	the	first	time	you	experience	the	eternal	and	that	very	experience	is	the
whole	purpose	of	 life	 the	whole	and	the	sole	purpose	of	 life	we	are	 living	in	a
bondage	 of	 course	 the	 bondage	 is	 very	 subtle	 the	 walls	 of	 the	 prison	 are	 not
outside	you	hence	you	cannot	see	them
they	are	within	you
they	have	been	 implanted	 inside	your	skin	but	 they	are	keeping	your	soul	 in	a
cage	so	you	walk
you	go	from	one	place	to	another	place	nobody	prevents	you
and	you	never	see
that	there	are	chains	on	your	hands	that	there	are	guards
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
who	will	not	allow	you	to	go	beyond	a	certain	boundary
hence	there	is	an	illusory	kind	of	freedom	one	goes	on	believing	that	one	is	free
but	 the	 society	has	 learned	very	cunning	methods	 through	millions	of	years	of
time	they	have	found	ways	to	chain	you	from	inside	not	with	iron	chains	but	by
thought	 chains	 not	 with	 iron	 walls	 but	 by	 ideologies	 scriptures,	 philosophies,
theologies,	religions	they	have	nailed	you	within	and	the	most	cunning	thing	is
that	they	have	put	you	on	guard	they	call	it	conscience
if	you	start	doing	something	against	what	they	want	you	to	do	somebody	inside
you,	a	voice	says	don't	do	it
that	is	not	your	voice
that	is	the	voice	of	the	collective	mind	and	you	feel	afraid
you	feel	as	if	god	has	spoken	to	you	as	if	god	is	preventing	you	it	is	just	a	social
trick,	a	very	crafty	phenomenon	it	is	not	your	conscience
it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 god	 but	 the	 society	 goes	 on	manipulating	 you	 from
within
don't	do	this,	don't	do	that,	do	this	even	against	yourself	you	go	on	doing	things
and	even	if	you	want	to	do	certain	things	you	don't	do	them	because
the	conscience	prevents	you	and	you	believe	that	the	conscience	is	yours	that	is
the	first	thing	to	be	dropped	by	a	sannyasin
the	 conscience	 is	 not	 yours,	 it	 is	 your	 prison	 the	 conscience	 is	 nothing	 but
slavery	 once	 you	 drop	 your	 conscience	 then	 you	 discover	 your	 consciousness
hidden	behind	the	prison	of	conscience	is	the	freedom	of	consciousness	--
and	consciousness	is	innocent	the	moment	you	discover	your	consciousness	you
discover	your	freedom
and	to	know	freedom
is	to	know	the	greatest	joy	in	life	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
meditation	is	only	a	method	of	undoing	what	the	society	has	done	to	you	sannyas
is	 a	 change	 of	 gestalt	 from	 conscience	 to	 consciousness	 and	 the	 method	 is
meditation	 the	 society	 has	 used	 mind	 as	 the	 method	 to	 remove	 you	 from
consciousness	to	conscience	what	i	am	trying	to	do	here	is	just	the	opposite	of	it,
the	very	reverse	of	it	using	meditation	as	a	process	of	shifting	you	back	towards
your	original	nature	towards	your	original	face	from	conscience	to	consciousness
from	bondage	to	freedom
the	innocent	person
does	 not	 have	 to	 cultivate	 simplicity	 if	 it	 is	 cultivated	 it	 is	 false	 anything
cultivated	 is	 always	 false	 let	 that	 be	 a	 criterion	 to	 judge	 by	 never	 cultivate
anything
simplicity,	humbleness,	compassion,	love,	purity	--
if	you	cultivate	them
you	are	creating	something	arbitrary	they	are	not	to	be	cultivated	seek	and	search
for	the	innocent	within	you	seek	for	the	source
that	you	had	come	with	into	the	world	go	back	to	that	original	point	the	moment
you	touch
the	original	point	of	your	being	something	starts	radiating	many	rays	start	arising
out	of	that	centre	those	rays	will	contain
the	whole	spectrum	of	simplicity,	compassion	love,	joy,	beauty,	grace,	godliness
but	 they	 all	 come	 as	 a	 by-product	 as	 consequences	 of	 discovering	 one's	 own
being	hence	i	don't	give	you	any	discipline	i	simply	give	you	an	insight	into	your
being	--
and	that's	enough
the	function	of	the	master	is	fulfilled	if	he	can	give	you	the	insight	to	see	your
spontaneous	 nature	 then	 everything	 else	 follows	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 and	 when
things	come	of	their	own	accord	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
they	have	tremendous	beauty	then	there	is	grace	and	grandeur	and	something	of
the	virgin	beyond	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#6
Chapter	title:	None
6	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103065
ShortTitle:	CLAPP06
Audio:
No
Video:
No
mind	is	never	pure
by	 its	 very	 nature	 it	 cannot	 be	 pure	 its	 whole	 strategy	 is	 of	 cunningness,
calculation	 mind	 is	 fear-oriented,	 it	 is	 a	 defence	 mechanism	 it	 cannot	 trust
existence,	life,	love	it	cannot	trust	anything
it	 only	 doubts,	 it	 is	 suspicious	 and	 the	 suspicious,	 doubting	 one	 can	 never	 be
pure	 purity	 is	 the	 quality	 of	 the	 heart	 just	 as	mind	 is	 intrinsically	 cunning	 the
heart	 is	 intrinsically	 innocent	 mind	 can	 be	 knowledgeable,	 heart	 can	 be	 wise
mind	can	be	learned
the	heart	can	be	childlike,	innocent	and	all	that	is	great	happens	in	the	heart	not
in	the	mind
sannyas	 is	 initiation	 into	 the	 ways	 of	 the	 heart	 it	 is	 getting	 out	 of	 the
imprisonment	 of	 the	 mind	 and	 entering	 into	 the	 freedom	 of	 the	 heart	 it	 is	 a
simple	process
all	that	is	needed	is	a	little	courage	to	trust	a	little	courage	to	put	doubts	aside	a
little	courage	to	risk
and	 then	miracles	start	happening	and	 they	go	on	happening	each	moment	 life
becomes	just	incredible	a	long,	long,	orgasmic	ecstatic	joy	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
mind	stinks
it	cannot	avoid	it,	its	very	functioning	is	rotten	it	lives	on	the	old,	the	dead,	the
past	it	feeds	on	corpses
hence	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 fragrance	 as	 far	 as	mind	 is	 concerned	 and	 all
people	 are	 living	 in	 the	 mind	 hence	 life	 has	 become	 a	 chaos	 a	 very	 muddy,
confused	affair	it	has	lost	all	the	celebration	no	flowers	grow	anywhere
as	 far	 as	 human	 consciousness	 is	 concerned	 only	 thorns,	 bloody	 thorns	 but
hidden
behind	the	thick	layers	of	the	mind	and	its	crap	is	a	beautiful	source
which	we	have	brought	from	the	beyond	our	heart
it	is	still	beating
its	 beat	 goes	 on	 becoming	 farther	 and	 farther	 away	because	 the	mind	 goes	 on
accumulating	junk	you	cannot	hear	its	beat,	you	cannot	taste	its	joy	its	fragrance
is	ready	to	be	released	the	hindrances	have	to	be	removed	and	the	only	hindrance
is	 the	 mind	 all	 other	 hindrances	 are	 part	 of	 the	 mind	 greed,	 jealousy,	 desire,
possessiveness,	anger,	ego	these	are	all	aspects	of	the	mind	rather	than	fighting
with	 each	 aspect	 separately	 which	 is	 an	 unnecessarily	 long	 process	 maybe
unending
the	best	way
is	 to	 cut	 the	 whole	 mind	 in	 a	 single	 blow	 that's	 what	 sannyas	 is	 all	 about
beheading	yourself
and	 the	 moment	 you	 put	 the	 whole	 mind	 aside	 and	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of
decisiveness	immediately	something	new
which	has	never	been	felt	within	you	starts	arising
a	fragrance
life	starts	becoming	a	 light	unto	itself	 life	starts	 taking	the	colours	 the	rainbow
colours	of	 love	festivity,	music,	poetry,	creativity,	sensitivity	 the	same	energies
which	were	involved	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
in	greed,	anger,	possessiveness,	jealousy	are	released
and	 the	 same	 energies	 start	moving	 into	 a	 totally	 different	 terrain,	 into	 a	 new
dimension	all	that	is	needed	on	the	part	of	my	sannyasins	is	to	shift	their	energies
from	the	head	to	the	heart	trust	the	heart,	try	to	live	the	heart	wherever	it	leads	go
with	 it	 without	 any	 doubt,	 without	 any	 fear	 follow	 the	 heart	 and	 you	 will	 be
following	true	religion	follow	the	mind
and	you	will	be	following
christianity,	hinduism,	mohammedanism	all	untrue	religions
the	true	religion	is	basically	individual	and	the	untrue	is	collective	mind	is	part
of	the	collective	and	the	heart	is	your	individual	source	people	are	living	a	life	of
curse	and	nobody	else	is	responsible	for	it	that	is	the	strangest	thing	about	it	they
themselves	 are	 responsible	 they	 have	 got	 caught	 in	 a	 pattern,	 a	 vicious	 circle
they	go	on	moving	 in	 the	wheel	clinging	 tightly	 to	 the	wheel	and	 the	wheel	 is
crushing	them	mind	is	a	wheel	with	many	spokes	but	exactly	in	the	centre	of	the
wheel	 there	 is	something	unmoving	unless	we	 touch	 that	centre	 that	unmoving
centre	 of	 all	 movement	 we	 can	 never	 feel	 the	 benediction	 of	 existence	 it	 is
always	there,	within	our	reach	any	moment	we	can	dive	deep	into	it	but	we	cling
to	the	wheel
and	the	faster	it	moves	the	more	afraid	we	are	and	so	we	cling	more	tightly	we
cling	to	our	doubts
not	seeing	a	simple	fact
that	a	person	who	lives	in	doubts	cannot	be	blissful	doubt	can	only	create	misery
because	it	is	negative	it	is	darkness
it	is	not	light
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	can	create	suspicion,	it	can	create	fear	it	can	create	a	persecution-mania	it	can
create	violence
but	 it	 cannot	 create	 bliss	 but	 still	 people	 brag	 about	 their	 doubting	mind	 they
think	 it	 is	 something	 great	 they	 talk	 about	 their	 scepticism	 they	 think	 it	 is
something	philosophical	 it	 is	 sheer	 stupidity	but	 they	make	much	 fuss	because
they	have	made	it	an	investment	of	their	life	they	cling	to	their	greed
knowing	perfectly	well	that	it	 is	unfulfillable	and	when	you	cling	to	something
which	is	unfulfillable
you	will	remain	miserable
wherever	you	are	misery	will	haunt	you	you	will	be	asking	for	more	and	more
and	whenever	you	ask	for	more	you	will	feel	frustrated
because	 it	 is	 never	 coming	 even	 if	 it	 comes	 your	 demand	 grows	 the	 demand
grows	in	the	same	proportion	so	you	remain	as	hungry,	as	beggarly	as	ever	and
this	is	the	case	with	everything	anger,	pessimism
always	seeing	the	negative	side	of	life	there	are	people
if	you	take	them	to	a	rose	bush	they	will	count	the	thorns	first	they	will	count	the
thorns	roses	don't	matter;	what	matters	is	thorns	and	then	their	fingers	are	bloody
and	they	are	hurting
and	 then	 they	become	so	angry	and	 their	eyes	become	so	antagonistic	 towards
the	rose	bush
that	it	becomes	impossible	to	see	the	roses	a	thick	fog	of	anger	surrounds	them
this	is	our	doing
a	sannyasin	has	to	be	aware	of	all	this	nonsense	if	you	go	to	a	rose	bush,	dance
around	it	look	at	the	roses
rejoice	in	the	roses
see	the	miracle
amongst	thousands	of	flowers	a	rose	has	blossomed
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
what	more	mystery	can	there	be?
jesus	walking	on	water	is	nothing	compared	to	it	in	fact	if	you	walk	on	water	you
will	only	look	silly	a	rose	growing	in	the	thorns	is	really	a	miracle	and	once	you
have	seen	the	rose,	the	positive	you	are	shifting	your	gears	from	the	mind	to	the
heart	from	cunningness	 to	 innocence	from	negativity	to	positivity	and	then	life
becomes	an	eternal	 song	 the	purest	experience	 in	 life	 is	 that	of	 love	sex	 is	not
love,	it	is	biological	prayer	is	not	love,	it	is	theological	the	first	--	sex,	which	is
misunderstood	by	many	as	love
is	 below	human	 consciousness	 it	 belongs	 to	 our	 past,	 it	 is	 just	 a	 hangover	 the
second	is	only	a	fiction	--	the	prayer	that,	too,	really	belongs	to	our	past	out	of
fear	man	started	praying	to	god	in	fact,	out	of	fear	he	created	god	god	is	nothing
but	fear	personified	so	one	is	biological
another	 is	 just	 religious,	 superstitious	 between	 the	 two	 is	 the	 golden	 mean
something	of	immense	value	that	is	love
it	 is	 more	 than	 sex	 and	 more	 than	 prayer	 it	 is	 the	 fragrance	 of	 human
consciousness	it	is	the	flowering	of	consciousness	itself	hence	i	put	love
as	the	highest	expression
of	all	that	is	great
jesus	says	god	is	love;	i	say	love	is	god	because	when	you	say	god	is	love	that
simply	means
god	may	have	many	other	qualities	love	is	only	one	of	the	qualities	of	god	god	is
important,	love	is	only	one	of	the	aspects	to	me	love	is	god
love	is	the	real	thing
godliness	is	only	one	of	the	qualities	of	love	my	message	is
beyond	biology	and	beyond	theology	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
my	message	is
simply	that	of	expanding	human	consciousness	and	love
is	nothing	but	sharing	of	your	consciousness	with	as	many	people	as	possible	not
only	with	people,	with	animals,	with	trees	with	birds,	with	clouds,	with	stars	the
whole	emphasis	is	on	sharing	not	with	whom
the	address	is	not	important	sharing
the	sheer	joy	of	sharing	your	being	is	love	and	that	is	the	purest	phenomenon	the
holiest	of	the	holy
the	most	sacred
and	 it	 is	 hidden	 in	 the	 very	 ordinariness	 of	 our	 lives	 so	 we	 are	 not	 to	 go
anywhere	to	search	for	it	we	have	to	dig	it
now	and	here
and	within	ourselves
the	heart	is	naturally	contented	it	never	asks	for	more
whatsoever	is,	is	more	than	enough	mind	is	naturally	discontented	whatsoever	is,
is	 never	 enough	more	 is	 needed	 hence	mind	 lives	 in	 a	 constant	 struggle	with
existence	never	at	ease,	always	tense	always	anxious,	worried
anguish	has	become	 its	very	centre	 just	 the	opposite	 is	 the	case	with	 the	heart
there	 is	no	conflict,	no	struggle	as	each	moment	unfolds	 the	heart	 lives	 it	with
joy	with	gratitude,	with	 immense	thankfulness	because	it	 is	a	gift	of	 the	whole
we	don't	deserve	it	at	all	if	next	moment	i	die
there	is	no	court	of	appeal	for	it	i	cannot	say	to	anybody
why
why	could	i	not	exist	for	a	few	minutes	more?
we	all	know	it
still	we	go	on	taking	for	granted	whatsoever	is	given	to	us
this	is	one	of	the	ugly	traits	of	the	mind	it	never	feels	grateful
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
hence	mind	can	never	be	religious	gratefulness	is	 the	core	of	religion,	 the	very
core	move	from	the	discontented	world	of	the	mind	to	the	contented	world	of	the
near	and	small	things	are	so	blissful	just	a	cup	of	tea
just	sipping	the	tea,	savouring	its	taste	and	flavour	is	as	great	an	ecstasy
as	 any	 buddha	 has	 achieved	 in	 his	 samadhi	 there	 is	 no	 difference	 at	 all	 the
question	is	not
whether	you	are	sitting	underneath	a	tree	and	meditating
or	sitting	in	your	room	and	sipping	tea	the	question	is	of	the	heart	if	the	heart	is
contented	in	the	moment	then	whether	under	the	tree,	in	the	mountains	or	in	the
room,	it	makes	no	difference	the	contented	heart	knows	the	beauties	of	existence
the	mysteries	of	life
all	the	doors	open	for	it
existence	is	closed	for	the	mind	open	for	the	heart
existence	is	closed	for	the	cunning	open	for	the	pure
god	to	me	is	not	a	person
but	 only	 a	 presence,	 an	 experience	 like	 love,	 like	 joy,	 like	 beauty	 you	 cannot
encounter	joy
you	cannot	meet	joy	and	say,	hello	how	are	you?
you	cannot	because	joy
is	not	something	separate	from	you	joy	is	an	experience,	so	is	the	case	with	joy
so	 my	 expression	 for	 god	 is	 godliness	 linguistically,	 gramatically,	 it	 does	 not
look	right	so	i	go	on	using	the	word	god	but	whenever	i	use	the	word	god	i	mean
godliness	purity	is	godliness
and	by	purity	i	don't	mean	a	moral	purity	following	the	ten	commandments	you
become	pure
that	 is	 not	 purity;	 that	 is	 sheer	 cunningness	 those	 ten	 commandments	 are
basically	jewish	it	is	a	business	proposal,	it	is	pure	business	it	is	arranging	for	the
other	world	creating	a	bank	balance	there	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
if	god	wants	these	things	to	be	done	only	then	you	will	be	allowed	in	so	okay,	we
will	do	these	things	but	it	is	only	a	doing
not	your	being
at	the	core	of	your	being	you	remain	the	same	following	all	the	commandments
and	 the	 real	 purity	 is	 not	 of	 doing	 but	 of	 being	 one	 has	 to	 be	 innocent	 in	 the
being	 then	 who	 cares	 about	 the	 heavenly	 pleasures	 and	 who	 cares	 about
paradise?
then	paradise	is	herenow
then	it	is	not	a	question	of	tomorrow	so	i	don't	teach	the	purity	of	so-called	moral
disciplines	i	only	teach	one	purity
the	 purity	 of	 changing	 the	 gestalt	 from	 the	mind	 to	 the	 heart	 becoming	more
heart-full	is	becoming	pure	becoming	less	mind-full	is	becoming	more	pure	the
moment	mind	 is	completely	gone	and	 there	 is	only	heart	 --	 throbbing,	dancing
you	have	arrived	home
and	that	is	the	moment
the	presence	of	godliness	is	felt	not	something	outer	to	you	but	something	within
your	very	soul	a	flame	of	your	own	consciousness	purity	is	a	light
mind	is	always	a	dark	night	of	the	soul	there	is	no	dawn	in	it
the	 night	 continues,	 it	 is	 an	 eternal	 night	 darkness	 is	 its	 very	 nature	 the	 heart
lives	always	in	the	dawn	it	is	always	light	there
so	it	is	not	a	question	of	bringing	light	to	the	mind	the	question	is	changing
the	altitude	of	your	existence	changing	the	plane,	the	dimension	if	one	remains
in	 the	mind	 one	will	 remain	 in	 darkness	 if	 one	 changes	 from	 the	mind	 to	 the
heart	suddenly	the	light	bursts	forth	it	is	like	standing	in	the	sun	with	closed	eyes
you	 are	 in	 darkness	 and	 there	 is	 light	 everywhere	 you	 are	 creating	 your	 own
darkness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
by	closing	your	eyes
just	open	the	eyes	and	you	start	laughing	you	see	the	ridiculousness	of	it	all	that
you	were	 the	cause	of	your	darkness	 that	 light	was	always	 there	and	you	were
unnecessarily	 missing	 it	 it	 was	 showering	 on	 you,	 available	 but	 you	 were
preventing	 it	 from	 reaching	 you	mind	 is	 a	 barrier	 to	 light	 and	we	 are	making
great	efforts	to	make	this	mind	bigger	and	bigger	the	whole	educational	system
consists	only	of	making	this	mind	bigger	and	bigger	one-third	of	a	human	life
twenty-five	 years	 are	 wasted	 just	 puffing	 the	 balloon	 of	 the	 mind	 bigger	 and
bigger
and	 it	 is	 an	 empty	 balloon,	 there	 is	 nothing	 in	 it	 nobody	 has	 ever	 achieved
anything	in	it	not	a	single	human	being	in	the	whole	of	history	has	said,	i	have
attained	contentment	through	mind	blissfulness	through	mind
immortality	through	mind
truth	 through	 mind,	 love	 through	 mind	 not	 a	 single	 statement,	 without	 any
exception.
mind	 has	 proved	 utterly	 impotent	 but	 still	 we	 go	 on	 carrying	 the	 old,	 rotten
tradition	of	making	it	bigger	and	bigger	that	man	is	almost	crushed	underneath	it
the	mind	has	become	mountainous	and	man	is	not	even	able	to	crawl	out	of	it	but
because	 we	 have	 created	 it	 and	 because	 it	 is	 only	 an	 empty	 balloon	 just	 a
pinprick	is	enough
nothing	else	is	needed
sannyas	is	that	pinprick
and	the	balloon	bursts
and	suddenly	there	is	rejoicing	as	the	air	goes	out	of	the	balloon	the	hot	air	--	and
it	is	very	hot	--
suddenly	a	cool	breeze	starts	arising	in	you	instead	of	darkness,	light	instead	of	a
burdensome	life,	a	dancing	quality	instead	of	living	for	tomorrow	the	joy	in	the
moment
the	freshness	of	the	moment	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	beauty	of	the	moment,	possesses	you	and	to	be	possessed	by	the	moment	is
all	there	is	nothing	more	to	it	the	greatest	experience	in	life	is	the	experience	of
being	nothing,	nobody	people	are	trying	to	be	somebody	in	some	way	or	other
in	 worldly	 ways,	 in	 other-worldly	 ways	 through	 money,	 power,	 prestige,
knowledge,	austerities
but	the	desire	is	the	same	to	be	somebody	in	particular,	to	be	at	the	top	it	is	such
a	childish	game	the	politicians	are	involved	in	it	the	saints	are	involved	in	it	the
politicians	can	be	forgiven	because	they	are	basically	stupid	people	but	how	to
forgive	the	saints?
they	are	also	on	the	same	trip	of	being	somebody	special
when	jesus	was	leaving	his	disciples	the	last	question	they	asked	was	now	that
you	are	leaving	us	you	are	being	caught	and	you	may	be	crucified	we	have	only
one	enquiry
that	in	the	kingdom	of	god,	of	course	you	will	be	at	his	right	hand	but	who	will
be	next	to	you?
do	you	see	these	fools?
their	desire,	the	whole	ego	trip	sannyas	is	seeing	the	foolishness	of	the	ego	trip
and	the	very	seeing	is	transforming	the	moment	you	see	that	it	is	utterly	stupid
there	is	no	point	in	being	somebody	one	is	perfectly	beautiful	as	one	is	and	the
more	 you	 are	 a	 nobody	 the	more	 you	 are	 at	 ease,	 relaxed	 the	more	 you	 are	 a
nothingness	 the	 less	 there	 is	 any	 possibility	 of	 worry,	 anxiety,	 anguish
nothingness	cannot	be	stirred	into	a	worry	for	what?
there	is	nothing	to	lose
there	is	nothing	to	be	afraid	of	there	is	nothing	to	miss
the	man	who	has	achieved	nothingness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
is	 really	 the	 richest	man	 in	 the	world	he	 is	 really	 in	 the	kingdom	of	god	he	 is
really	an	emperor
and	we	are	all	entitled	to	achieve	it	we	just	have	to	be	a	little	more	clear	about
the	whole	trip	in	which	we	have	been	forced	by	the	society,	by	the	parents	by	the
people	who	have	surrounded	us	by	the	people	who	have	conditioned	us	we	just
have	to	see	the	point	that	we	have	been	dragged
into	an	unnecessary	turmoil	then	drop	out	of	it	and	drop	in	drop	out	of	the	game
of	 the	 ego	 and	 drop	 into	 your	 pure	 nothingness	 and	 suddenly	 a	 revolution,	 a
sudden	 transformation	 we	 have	 called	 this	 experience	 enlightenment
buddhahood,	awakening
the	ego	trip	is	a	dream
the	moment	you	are	ready	to	be	nothing	the	dream	disappears
and	then	each	moment
has	such	a	crystal	clarity	to	it	such	immense	truth	in	it
that	 one	 cannot	 feel	 cheated	 by	 existence	 one	 cannot	 doubt	 even	 for	 a	 single
moment	that	life	is	meaningless
life	becomes	so	full	of	meaning	so	brim-full,	overflowing
that	for	the	first	time	consciousness	starts	growing	flowers
for	the	first	time	the	spring	comes	hence	i	have	chosen	the	colour	for	my	sannyas
the	colour	of	the	spring	in	the	east	mind	can	compose	many	songs	but	they	will
be	only	compositions	not	creations	words	can	be	arranged
in	a	certain	rhythm,	in	a	certain	metre	but	that	is	only	the	appearance	of	a	song
that	is	not	the	way	to	arrive	at	the	real	song	it	is	a	plastic	flower,	put	together	it
has	not	grown,	it	has	not	blossomed	in	the	east	we	have	two	words	for	the	poet
one	is	kavi	which	literally	means	the	poet	another	is	rishi	which	means	a	seer	the
poet	belongs	to	the	mind	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	composes	songs,	music
creates	 dances,	 sculpture,	 painting	 the	 seer	 moves	 to	 a	 different	 centre	 of	 his
being	from	the	circumference	to	the	centre	and	when	he	is	at	his	own	heart	the
purest	spot	in	his	being,	the	virgin	spot	where	nobody	can	enter	except	oneself
which	 is	 absolutely	 private	 uncontaminated	 by	 any	 influence	 from	 the	 outside
there	is	no	way	to	condition	it	no	way	even	to	touch	it
when	one	reaches
that	purest	virgin	spot	of	one's	own	being	then	creativity	erupts
then	one	does	not	compose	a	song	one	simply	sings	 it,	hums	 it	 it	 comes	of	 its
own	accord	then	the	dance	happens
you	are	just	a	witness	to	it,	not	a	doer	then	creativity	becomes	your	very	life	then
whatsoever	you	touch	starts	changing	into	gold	you	may	be	appreciated	or	not	--
that	 is	 irrelevant	 people	 may	 understand,	 may	 not	 understand	 there	 is	 every
possibility	that	you	may	not	be	understood	you	may	be	misunderstood
more	 often	 than	 understood	 because	 you	 will	 be	 speaking	 a	 totally	 different
language	 and	 people	 understand	 the	 language	 of	 the	 mind	 and	 you	 will	 be
speaking
some	foreign	tongue	to	them	of	the	heart
mind	 is	 all	 sound,	 sound	 signifying	 nothing	 a	 tale	 told	 by	 an	 idiot,	much	 ado
about	nothing	but	mind	creates	much	dust,	so	much	that	in	the	clouds	of	mind-
dust	one	tends	to	forget	everything	it	is	very	clever	and	efficient	in	creating	fuss
for	any	reason	or	no	reason	at	all	--	it	is	fussy	if	there	is	some	reason	--	good	if
there	is	no	reason,	it	can	always	invent	it	is	very	inventive	but	it	goes	on	making
noise	if	you	watch	your	mind
you	can	see	how	much	noise	it	makes	continuously,	day	in,	day	out,	year	in,	year
out	it	starts	kicking	in	the	mother's	womb	till	it	kicks	the	bucket,	goes	on	kicking
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	just	close	by	it	there	is	a	small	spot	which	is	absolutely	silent	which	makes
no	fuss,	no	noise	and	that	is	your	heart
and	that	is	your	purity
that	is	your	innocence
and	out	of	that	innocence
is	 the	experience	of	godliness	out	of	 that	 innocence	 the	celestial	music	 is	born
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
there	is	no	conflict
hence	there	are	no	hands	clapping	there	is	no	clash,	otherwise	it	will	also	create
noise	it	is	absolute	silence,	but	silence	is	not	dead	the	silence	has	its	own	rhythm
its	own	vibe
its	own	music
its	own	beauty
and	its	own	blessing
hence	in	the	east	it	is	called	anahat	nad
anahat	nad	means	unstruck	sound	the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
one	 hand	 clapping	 does	 not	 make	 any	 sound	 but	 it	 indicates	 something
tremendously	 significant	 there	 is	 no	 clash,	 no	 noise	 but	 there	 is	 music,	 great
music	here	is	a	dance	in	the	heart	the	very	heartbeat
starts	 having	 a	 subtle	 rhythm	 to	 it	 you	 cannot	 share	 it	with	 anybody	 else	 it	 is
unsharable
it	is	a	secret
you	can	experience	it,	you	can	live	it	but	you	cannot	say	it
you	can	show	it	but	you	cannot	say	it	hence	my	sannyasins	will	feel	embarrassed
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
everywhere	in	the	world
whenever	people	ask
what	has	happened	to	you
why	have	you	gone	crazy?
they	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 answer	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 answer	 they	 have	 tasted
something,	they	know	the	taste	it	is	on	their	tongue,	but	it	is	inexpressible	they
have	fallen	into	a	certain	dance	they	have	enjoyed	a	certain	silence	but	it	is	not
possible	to	put	it	into	words	all	words	are	inadequate
but	who	cares?
when	somebody	asks	you
what	has	happened	to	you?
sing	a	song,	dance,	laugh,	roll	on	the	ground	do	something
rather	 than	 saying,	 show	 something	 show	 your	 bliss,	 show	 your	 benediction
maybe,	if	somebody	is	still	alive	something	in	him	may	respond	something	may
be	 triggered	 in	 him	 something	may	 start	 synchronising	 with	 you	maybe	 your
laughter
can	trigger	a	belly-laughter	in	him	maybe	your	song	can	hit	a	new	space	in	his
being	 you	 may	 become	 a	 catalytic	 agent	 that's	 all	 sannyasins	 can	 do	 my
sannyasins	cannot	be	missionaries	they	can	only	be	catalytic	agents	The	Sound
of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#7
Chapter	title:	None
7	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103075
ShortTitle:	CLAPP07
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	 life	 without	 love	 is	 life	 without	 life	 itself	 it	 is	 just	 lived	 at	 the	 minimum
somehow	lived,	in	fact	a	drag	it	is	boredom,	meaninglessness	it	is	simply	waiting
for	nothing	to	happen	waiting	for	godot
and	godot	never	comes	--	what	comes	is	death	the	man	without	love	is	born	dead
lives	dead,	dies	dead
it	is	a	long	process	of	death	but	love	brings	a	transformation	love	is	like	spring
suddenly	 hidden	 sources	 start	 flowing	 for	 the	 first	 time	 one	 feels	 the	 thrill	 of
existence	 the	 adventure,	 the	 immense	 call	 of	 the	 unknown	 and	 a	 tremendous
desire	to	plunge	into	the	ocean	of	existence	that's	exactly	what	love	is	a	longing
to	meet	with	the	whole	and	in	that	very	longing
life	starts	reaching	higher	peaks	it	starts	becoming	a	living	fragrance	there	is	no
other	purpose
life	 itself	 is	 its	 own	 end	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 remember	 it	 continuously
because	for	centuries
the	people's	minds	have	been	diverted	life	has	been	made	a	means	to	some	other
end	and	life	is	not	a	means
it	is	an	end	unto	itself
and	the	moment	life	is	an	end	unto	itself	it	 is	nothing	but	pure	love	love	is	the
taste	of	the	real	person	the	authentic	person
his	vibe,	his	flavour,	his	fragrance	love	brings	many	gifts,	unaccountable	gifts	an
unending	procession	of	gifts	these	are	a	few	of	the	gifts	of	love	one	becomes	just
--	only	love	can	be	just	love	cannot	be	unjust	by	its	very	nature	it	cannot	harm,	it
can	only	help	it	cannot	be	prejudicial;	it	is	absolutely	impartial	it	never	uses	the
other	as	a	means	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	is	reducing	the	other	into	a	thing	into	a	commodity
love	respects
love	has	no	possibility
of	 ever	 reducing	 people	 into	 things	 they	 are	 respected	 as	 divine	 beings	 as
personifications	of	godliness	and	you	cannot	be	unjust
when	you	 think	of	 the	other	as	divine	and	 the	moment	your	 life	 is	 full	of	 love
and	justice
there	is	glory,	there	is	great	rejoicing	in	your	being	there	is	a	simple	law	of	life	if
you	harm	others
you	cannot	be	happy,	you	cannot	be	blissful	if	you	harm	others
the	 harm	will	 come	 back	 to	 you	multiplied	 if	 you	 help,	 the	 same	 is	 also	 true
whatsoever	you	give	comes	back	a	thousandfold	so	once	a	person	starts	sharing
his	love,	his	joy	he	is	showered	by	existence	from	all	nooks	and	corners	flowers
start	raining	on	him	he	becomes	enthroned
he	becomes	glorious
there	is	no	other	glory
compared	 to	 the	 glory	 of	 love	 even	 the	 greatest	 emperor	 is	 a	 pauper	 in
comparison	to	a	lover
he	may	have	all	the	riches	of	the	world	he	may	have	conquered	the	whole	world
but	he	has	missed	his	own	heart	deep	down	he	is	just	darkness	there	is	no	light
within	him	his	life	may	be	surrounded	by	many	many	pleasures	but	deep	down
there	is	a	wound	a	cancerous	wound
his	 love	 energy	 has	 not	 become	 a	 flower	 and	 when	 love	 energy	 remains
unflowered	it	turns	into	a	wound
it	turns	into	pus,	it	stinks	hence	the	politicians	stink,	they	are	bound	to	they	are
the	people	without	love	the	great	conquerors
from	alexander	to	napoleon,	to	adolf	hitler	they	all	stink
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
for	the	simple	reason
that	they	have	missed	flowering	their	spring	has	not	happened	love	is	my	simple
message
no	other	gospel	is	needed
love	 is	 enough,	 more	 than	 enough	 it	 is	 the	 whole	 alchemy	 of	 transformation
mind	knows	no	contentment
because	mind	 is	without	 love	and	contentment	 is	a	by-product	of	 love	mind	 is
logic	--	logic	is	basically	discontentment	it	is	argument	with	existence,	it	is	not
agreement	even	if	logicians	agree,	they	only	agree	to	disagree	their	fundamental
approach	 is	of	disagreement	mind	is	 in	a	constant	 fight	and	of	course,	 fighting
with	the	whole	is	doomed	from	the	very	beginning	--
you	cannot	win
how	can	a	small	wave	of	the	ocean	hope	to	win	against	the	ocean?
the	very	desire	is	simply	insane	and	mind	breeds	all	kinds	of	insanities	but	they
all	start	from	the	seed	of	discontentment	a	sannyasin	has	to	shift	his	energy	from
the	mind	to	the	heart	from	logic	to	love
the	moment	you	are	loving
you	are	starting	to	agree	with	existence	that's	what	love	is	all	about	an	agreement
not	reluctantly	done,	joyously	done	not	unwilling	done,	but	dancingly	done	with
great	relish	and	gusto	as	if	one	is	coming	home
the	existence	is	our	home
the	very	idea	of	struggle	and	fight	is	stupid	there	is	no	point	in	it
i	teach	harmony
be	in	tune	with	existence
with	trees,	with	the	wind,	with	the	rain,	with	the	sun	be	in	tune
and	wherever	you	find	yourself	disagreeing	remember	you	are	at	fault
existence	is	always	right
so	whenever	you	are	miserable	you	are	wrong	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
drop	your	wrong
don't	 try	 to	 correct	 existence,	 that	 cannot	 be	 done	 that	 which	 cannot	 be	 done
should	not	be	tried	because	that	is	a	futile	effort	don't	be	american
the	american	philosophy	is	try	it	and	try	it	and	try	it	again	i	say,	try	it,	try	it,	but
don't	try	it	again	otherwise	you	will	look	silly	twice	is	enough,	thrice	is	too	much
and	 if	 you	go	on	 trying	 then	you	 are	 just	 being	 stupid	 give	 it	 a	 try,	 perhaps	 a
second	try	but	then	enough	is	enough
then	 stop	 trying	 and	 start	 enjoying	 struggle	 is	 not	 the	 way	 of	 love,	 harmony,
accord.
the	 moment	 you	 are	 in	 accord	 with	 the	 whole	 life	 becomes	 a	 tremendous
contentment	 so	 deep,	 so	 unfathomable,	 so	 immeasurable	 so	 indefinable,	 so
inexpressible	and	we	are	all	searching	for	it	but	searching	in	a	wrong	way,	in	the
american	way	it	can	be	found	right	now
but	you	have	to	put	your	struggle	aside	relax
and	suddenly	it	is	there
i	know	only	one	prayer
the	 prayer	 that	 comes	 as	 a	 shadow	 of	 a	 loving	 heart	 a	 by-product	 of	 love,	 a
consequence	 of	 love	 it	 has	 not	 to	 be	 done,	 it	 happens	 it	 is	 not	 addressed	 to
anybody	it	is	an	unaddressed	thankfulness	to	the	whole	to	all	that	is
and	remember,	it	is	unexpressed	words	won't	help
words	are	very	small	and	love	is	vast	as	vast	as	the	sky	itself
you	cannot	force	the	sky	into	a	word	so	all	prayers	which	consist	of	words	are
man's	inventions
but	there	is	a	prayer	which	does	not	consist	of	words	which	has	never	been	said
which	will	never	be	said
but	 which	 has	 happened	 many	 times	 and	 will	 go	 on	 happening	 many	 times
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	happens	when	you	are	in	total	love	when	there	is	nobody	holding	back	when
you	 have	 gone	 completely	 into	 the	whole	with	 no	 conditions,	 with	 no	 strings
attached	with	no	demands
when	 you	 have	 relaxed	 yourself	 surrendered	 yourself	 to	 the	 ultimate	 unity	 of
things	to	the	celestial	music
and	 you	 have	 just	 become	 a	 simple	 note	 in	 it	 no	 longer	 carrying	 any
separatehood	just	a	simple	harmonious	part	of	it	then	there	is	prayer
that	prayer	can	only	be	defined	as	unexpressed	gratefulness
unsaid	thankfulness
compassion	without	love	is	hypocrisy	one	can	practise	it,	cultivate	it	that's	what
christian	missionaries	go	on	doing	all	over	the	world
it	 is	 compassion	 without	 love	 of	 course	 there	 are	 motives	 hidden	 behind	 it
because	love	is	missing
so	some	motive	 is	bound	 to	be	 there	 the	motive	 is	 to	 reach	heaven	 to	attain	 to
heavenly	pleasures	it	is	a	business,	it	is	a	bargain	here	we	sacrifice
there	we	will	get	more	than	we	are	sacrificing	with	all	the	interest	due
and	here	is	only	a	small	life	and	there	you	will	attain	to	pleasures	for	infinity,	for
eternity	it	is	really	a	lottery
giving	just	a	small	coin
and	then	getting	millions	of	dollars	out	of	it	it	is	gambling
but	these	gamblers
have	been	praised	down	the	ages	as	saints
they	are	 simply	business	people	 to	me	compassion	without	 love	 is	pseudo	and
has	been	the	cause
of	many	mischievous	 deeds	 on	 the	 earth	 love	 has	 to	 be	 the	 beginning	 of	 real
compassion	when	it	comes	out	of	love	then	there	is	no	motive	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
then	it	is	unmotivated
and	anything	unmotivated	has	a	sheer	beauty	when	you	do	something
just	because	you	love	to	do	it	for	no	other	reason	at	all	nothing	has	to	be	gained
out	of	it	you	may	in	fact	lose	something	but	you	cannot	gain	anything	still	you
want	to	do	it
because	 it	 is	 such	 a	 joy	 to	 do	 it	 then	 compassion	 is	 a	 healing	 force	 then
whomsoever	it	touches	it	heals	then	whomsoever	it	comes	close	to	it	transforms
so	i	don't	say	cultivate	compassion	i	say	be	loving
and	compassion	will	come	of	its	own	accord	when	you	find	it	following	you	of
its	own	accord	then	welcome	it,	but	never	cultivate	it	never	try	to	be	of	service	to
people	these	do-gooders	are	the	most	dangerous	people	in	the	world
these	are	the	criminals
in	 the	 name	 of	 beautiful	words	 they	 are	 dominating	 humanity	 of	 course	when
you	serve	somebody	you	oblige	him	you	become	higher,	he	becomes	lower	you
have	really	humiliated	him	but	love	never	humiliates
in	fact	it	exalts
so	it	is	not	a	question	of	serving	it	is	a	question	of	living	your	love	it	has	nothing
to	do	with	the	other	it	has	something	to	do	with	your	innermost	being	you	are	so
full	of	love	that	you	want	to	share	it	just	like	a	rain	cloud
so	full	of	rainwater	it	wants	to	shower	it	is	not	much	concerned	where,	on	whom
it	will	shower	on	the	rich	it	will	shower	on	the	poor	it	will	shower	on	the	rocks	it
will	shower	on	the	soil	it	will	simply	shower
unconcerned	on	whom	it	 is	bestowing	on	whom	it	 is	 showering	 its	 richness	 in
fact	it	is	not	obliging	anybody	on	the	contrary	it	is	being	obliged	by	everybody
whosoever	is	receiving	its	showers	is	obliging	him	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	real	man	of	love
is	 continuously	 obliged	 by	 everybody	 whosoever	 greets	 his	 love,	 receives	 his
love	it	is	a	totally	different	dimension	it	starts	by	being	loving
not	by	being	compassionate	all	 the	 religions	 in	 the	world	have	been	doing	 just
the	opposite	they	teach	you	to	be	compassionate	then	you	will	be	loving
i	say	to	you
be	loving
compassion	comes	on	its	own	love	should	not	be	an	idea	it	should	be	just	pure
living	one	should	not	 think	of	 love	as	a	 far	away	 ideal	 that	has	 to	be	achieved
somewhere	in	the	future,	tomorrow
it	should	be	something	immediate	like	breathing
you	don't	postpone	it	for	tomorrow	you	don't	say,	i	will	breathe	when	i	have	time
or	when	i	retire
or	when	i	am	finished	with	other	important	things	breathing	can	wait
but	that's	what	people	are	doing	with	love	and	love	is	exactly	the	breathing	of	the
soul	just	as	breathing	is	for	the	body	love	is	for	the	soul
don't	postpone	it
not	even	for	a	single	moment	if	there	is	a	choice
whether	to	postpone	breathing	or	love	then	postpone	breathing
because	you	will	not	lose	much	but	don't	postpone	love
that	is	the	very	essential	core	of	life	each	moment
find	ways	of	how	to	breathe	love	and	there	are	infinite	possibilities	one	just	has
to	look	for	them	and	they	are	there,	they	have	always	been	there	we	have	been
avoiding
a	sannyasin	starts	changing	his	valuation	he	changes	his	gestalt
it	is	like	you	are	reading	a	book	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	jump	from	one	word	to	another	word	and	you	always	miss	the	gap	between
the	words	which	is	always	there
you	can	change	 the	gestalt	you	can	start	 jumping	from	one	gap	 to	another	gap
leaving	the	words
and	then	you	will	be	surprised	it	is	the	same	book
but	 the	message	 is	 totally	different	 then	you	can	read	 the	gita,	bible,	koran	but
you	will	be	reading	the	same	book	the	book	of	nothingness
then	whether	you	read	hebrew	or	latin	or	greek	does	not	matter
because	you	are	reading	only	the	intervals	which	are	neither	hebrew	nor	sanskrit
nor	greek	nor	latin
which	are	simply	gaps
the	same	is	true	about	our	life	we	have	to	change	our	gestalt	we	look	for	misery,
we	find	it	start	looking	for	joy	and	you	will	find	it	we	look	for	thorns	and	they
are	there	start	looking	for	flowers
and	they	have	always	been	there	just	waiting	for	you	to	look	at	them	love	should
be	our	continuous	choice	find	out	ways	and	means	in	every	situation	so	that	you
can	love
even	a	person	who	 is	 very	 repulsive	 to	you	may	have	 something	 that	 you	 can
love	in	him	once	it	happened
a	man	died
he	was	the	worst	man	of	the	town,	the	most	hated	and	the	ritual	of	the	town	was
that	before	a	person	can	be	burned	somebody	should	speak	in	praise	of	him	but
there	was	nothing	 to	 say	 in	praise	of	 that	man	everybody	was	 looking	at	 each
other	what	to	say
because	whatsoever	you	say	will	be	wrong	and	nobody	wanted	to	say	anything
in	 praise	 of	 that	 ugly	 man;	 he	 has	 been	 such	 a	 torture	 they	 were	 all	 feeling
relieved	 that	 at	 last	 they	were	 finished	with	 him	but	 the	 burial	 could	 not	 start
finally,	one	man	stood	up
and	he	said,	this	beautiful	man	is	dead	he	was	beautiful
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
as	far	as	his	four	other	brothers	are	concerned	remember	those	four	who	are	still
alive	in	comparison	to	those	four	he	was	the	noblest	person	you	can	think	about
and	the	whole	crowd	clapped	and	appreciated	this	was	a	truth
they	had	completely	forgotten	about	the	four	who	are	still	alive	you	can	always
find	something	even	the	worst	man
you	just	have	to	look	for	it	and	you	can	also	find	the	worst	in	the	best	man	you
just	have	to	look	for	it	it	is	only	a	question	of	outlook	a	sannyasin	has	to	choose
all	those	aspects	of	life	and	people
which	create	a	response	in	you	of	love	so	slowly	your	life	becomes	a	continuum
of	 love	from	one	moment	 to	 the	other	 it	 starts	growing	deeper	and	deeper	 into
love	when	you've	reached	the	unfathomable	you	have	come	home
unfathomable	love	is	the	ultimate	secret	of	life	but	the	journey	begins	now	love
is	the	most	beautiful	phenomenon	in	existence	flowers	are	beautiful
rainbows	are	beautiful
stars	are	beautiful
but	 they	 are	 nothing	 compared	 to	 love	 because	 they	 are	 all	 material
manifestations	 love	 is	 the	 manifestation	 of	 consciousness	 it	 is	 the	 flower	 of
consciousness	 it	 is	all	 the	colours	of	 the	rainbow	but	 its	constituent	 factors	are
not	material	but	non-material
it	is	all	the	light	of	the	stars,	but	stars	die	sooner	or	later	they	will	go	out	of	life
continuously	they	are	fading	out	love	has	an	eternal	source	of	light	it	never	dies,
it	 is	 immortal	hence	 its	beauty	 is	divine	 to	 love	 is	 the	only	religion	 there	 is	all
other	religions	are	a	hindrance	to	love	naturally,	because	they	are	competitors	in
the	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
marketplace
they	are	all	against	love
they	 know	 certainly	 that	 if	 love	 wins	 then	 mohammedanism,	 christianity,
hinduism	all	are	gone
so	they	will	not	allow	love	they	will	cripple	and	paralyse	love	in	every	possible
way
that's	what	they	have	been	doing	for	thousands	of	years
they	 have	 poisoned	 the	 very	 source	 of	 love	 my	 effort	 here	 is	 to	 purify	 your
sources	of	 love	 to	bring	you	back	 the	gift	 that	you	had	brought	with	you	from
your	very	childhood
it	has	to	be	refined,	purified,	it	has	to	be	reclaimed	once	you	have	started	living
just	a	little	bit	of	love	and	that's	enough	that	small	flame	of	love	is	enough	then
the	 whole	 forest	 of	 your	 life	 will	 be	 aflame	 love	 can	 be	 lived	 but	 cannot	 be
known	love	can	be	experienced	but	cannot	be	measured	 love	can	be	 tasted	but
cannot	be	expressed	it	is	indefinable
it	is	the	most	mysterious	experience	in	existence	and	the	most	glorious
and	the	most	exalted
and	the	most	ecstatic
but	the	strange	calamity	is	that	people	go	on	looking	for	everything	except	love
yes,	they	talk	about	love	but	it	is	mere	talk	they	don't	live	it
they	want	 love	 but	 they	 don't	 give	 it	 and	when	 everybody	wants	 and	 nobody
gives	how	can	it	happen?
love	has	to	be	given
and	then	it	comes	of	its	own	accord	existence	is	not	miserly
if	we	give	and	share	it	returns	back	but	one	should	not	give
in	order	to	get	something	back	because	that	is	not	giving	one	should	simply	give
for	the	sheer	joy	of	giving	and	then	it	comes
and	 it	comes	as	a	great	 surprise	because	you	were	not	expecting	you	were	not
hoping
you	were	not	waiting
and	suddenly	the	guest	has	come	and	he	has	knocked	on	the	door
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
in	india	we	have	a	very	beautiful	word	for	the	guest	it	does	not	exist	in	any	other
language	in	india	our	word	for	the	guest	is	atiti	atiti	means
one	who	comes	without	informing	you	if	he	informs	you	he	is	not	a	guest	if	he
gives	 you	 a	 date:	 that	 i	 am	coming	on	 this	 date,	 by	 this	 train	 then	he	 is	 not	 a
guest
because	you	are	already	prepared	then	you	are	going	to	receive	him	at	the	station
and...
then	you	are	ready,	then	it	is	not	a	surprise	the	guest	is	a	guest
only	when	suddenly	out	of	nowhere	the	door	opens	and	the	guest	enters	and	for	a
moment	you	cannot	believe	your	own	eyes	that	moment	of	surprise
comes	in	the	life	of	a	sannyasin	every	day	every	moment
because	he	is	not	expecting	anything	he	is	simply	giving
and	each	moment	brings	thousands	of	miracles	and	these	miracles	go	on
becoming	bigger	and	bigger	life	becomes	a	sheer	celebration	love	is	the	secret	of
it	 all	 love	 is	 the	 greatest	 treasure	 the	most	 precious	 benediction	 and	 it	 is	 our
birthright,	everybody	is	entitled	to	it	it	is	not	something	that	needs	rare	talents	it
is	not	something	like	painting	or	music	or	poetry	love	is	a	natural,	spontaneous
phenomenon	to	all	beings
so	 nobody	 is	 more	 endowed	 or	 less	 endowed	 as	 far	 as	 love	 is	 concerned
existence	is	absolutely	communistic	all	are	equal
but	the	strange	thing	is
that	very	few	people
are	even	aware	of	 their	 treasures	and	 the	 reason	 is	 that	we	are	 looking	outside
and	love	resides	inside
we	are	wandering	everywhere	in	search	of	it	and	it	is	just	sitting
at	the	very	centre	of	our	being	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
hence	all	that	is	needed	is	a	simple	process	of	returning	home
a	one-hundred-eighty	 degree	 turn	 towards	 oneself	 that's	what	 i	 call	meditation
meditation	is	looking	in
the	moment	you	look	in
the	 world	 of	 love	 opens	 up	 and	 immediately	 you	 are	 blessed	 immediately	 all
poverty	disappears	all	longing,	all	discontent	disappears	immediately,	instantly
all	that	you	wanted	always	to	happen,	has	happened	one	simply	starts	dancing
in	sheer	thankfulness
one	cannot	say	anything	about	love	or	whatsoever	can	be	said
will	be	only	approximately	true,	not	really	true	it	will	be	at	the	most	only	a	far
away	echo	a	reflection	of	the	moon	in	the	lake	but	not	the	truth	of	love	itself	the
truth	of	love	is	basically	experienced	in	silence	utter	silence
one	has	to	be	so	silent
that	not	 even	a	 ripple	of	 thought	moves	 inside	 so	 silent	 that	one	has	 lost	 even
hearing	 the	sound	of	one's	own	heart	beats	so	silent	 that	all	noise	of	 the	world
within	and	without
has	completely	ceased
just	 a	pure	nothingness	prevails	 in	 that	nothingness	one	hears	 the	unheard	one
experiences	the	unimaginable	that	silence	is	not	a	dead	silence	it	is	very	alive
more	alive	than	anything	you	have	ever	known	it	is	full	of	subtle	music	but	the
music	does	not	consist	of	sound	it	is	soundless	music
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
once	that	Sound
of	one	hand
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Clapping
is	heard
one	has	heard	all	the	buddhas	all	the	awakened	ones
all	the	masters
one	has	heard	 all	 that	 is	worth	hearing	one	has	 tasted	 the	nectar	 of	 life	 so	 the
preparation	for	love	is	preparation	for	a	deep	silence	a	virgin	silence
and	it	is	simply	possible
it	is	not	an	arduous	phenomenon	it	is	not	like	rising
towards	a	high	mountainous	peak	it	is	far	more	easy
it	is	totally	different,	just	the	opposite	a	glacier	descending
from	the	peaks	of	the	mountains	slowly
without	any	sound
without	any	fuss	and	fury
silently	sliding	towards	the	valley	it	is	just	like	that
lao	tzu	says,	it	is	like
the	river	going	towards	the	ocean	he	calls	it	the	watercourse	way	it	is	easier	for
the	river	to	go	to	the	ocean
because	the	water	is	always	searching	and	seeking	the	lowest	point	it	is	always
seeking	the	deepest	valley	it	is	not	a	search	to	be	the	first	but	to	be	the	last
and	when	one	wants	to	be	the	last	there	is	no	problem	at	all	when	one	wants	to
be	the	first	then	there	is	trouble	jesus	says,	blessed	are	those	who	can	stand	last
in	the	line	up	to	that	point	i	agree	with	him	absolutely	agree	with	him
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
blessed	are	those	who	are	ready	to	be	the	last	but	then	he	adds	something	which
drives	christians	nuts	all	over	the	world	then	he	says
blessed	are	 those	who	are	 to	be	 the	 last	 for	 theirs	shall	be	 the	kingdom	of	god
now	the	motive	enters	in
now	it	becomes	a	business	proposal	to	be	the	last	means
if	you	want	to	be	the	first	in	the	kingdom	of	god	then	be	the	last
it	is	not	the	way	of	being	the	last	if	i	have	to	say	it	i	will	say	blessed	are	the	last
because	they	are	the	last	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#8
Chapter	title:	None
8	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103085
ShortTitle:	CLAPP08
Audio:
No
Video:
No
the	experience	of	bliss	is	not	something	arduous	it	is	not	something	upstream	on
the	contrary	it	is	a	question	of	relaxing,	resting	it	is	not	something	to	be	achieved
and	cultivated	so	those	who	want	to	be	with	the	crowd	it	is	already	there,	it	has
only	to	be	tasted	hence	the	only	thing
that	is	preventing	people	from	being	blissful	is	a	courageous	heart
people	are	being	very	cowardly	they	are	being	taught	to	be	cowardly	their	whole
pattern	of	 life	 is	underlined	with	 a	 current	of	 fear	 this	 is	our	politics,	 religion,
culture,	 society	 it	 depends	 on	 fear	 and	 exploitation	 of	 fear	 hence	 the	moment
somebody	decides	to	be	blissful	nobody	can	prevent	him
no	force,	no	power	can	prevent	him	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
just	a	little	courage
courage	 to	 risk,	courage	 to	be	alone	courage	 to	go	against	 the	crowd,	 the	mob
courage	not	to	follow	and	imitate	the	fools	they	are	all	miserable
and	they	would	like	you	also	to	be	just	like	them	and	they	will	create	every	kind
of	hindrance	 if	you	start	being	different	 the	crowd	never	 likes	anybody	who	 is
different	from	it
he	looks	like	a	foreigner,	he	is	suspicious,	suspected	he	cannot	be	trusted	--	he	is
not	 one	of	 us	 that	 is	 the	 logic	of	 the	 crowd	 so	 those	who	want	 to	be	with	 the
crowd	can	never	be	blissful
then	 their	destiny	 is	 closed	 they	will	 live	 in	misery	and	die	 in	misery	 it	 is	our
decision,	it	is	our	life	it	is	nobody	else's	business	and	one	should	not	lose	one's
life	just	for	the	sheer	sake	of	conformity	convention,	respectability	once	you	are
ready	to	drop	all	that	nonsense	the	dawn	has	come
suddenly	the	light	bursts	forth	and	life	becomes	a	beautiful	dance	there	 is	only
one	religion	and	that	is	the	religion	of	bliss	the	moment	you	are	blissful	you	are
religious	if	you	are	not	blissful	you	are	irreligious	that	is	my	definition
simple	but	of	immense	implications	you	need	not	be	a	christian	or	a	hindu	or	a
mohammedan	to	be	religious	the	whole	earth	is	full	of	these	people	and	there	is
no	religious	quality	anywhere	all	these	religions	have	been	quarrelling	fighting,
killing	each	other	in	the	name	of	god
in	the	name	of	love
in	the	name	of	peace
this	is	such	a	ridiculous	situation	that	it	seems	unbelievable	that	for	thousands	of
years	we	have	lived	with	this	situation	and	we	have	not	yet	been	able	to	change
it	it	is	so	illogical,	irrational,	so	absurd	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
my	message	is	very	simple
just	be	blissful
and	 don't	 bother	 about	 dogmas,	 creeds	whether	 there	 is	 a	 god	 or	 not	whether
there	is	an	after-life	or	not	these	are	all	irrelevant	questions	what	matters	is:	right
now	are	you	blissful	or	not?
if	you	are	blissful	then	everything	that	is	true	is	going	to	happen	to	you
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 search	 for	 it	 it	 will	 come	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 if	 you	 are
miserable
you	can	go	on	gathering	knowledge	esoteric,	occult	and	all	kinds	of	bullshit	but
it	is	of	no	use
you	remain	miserable	all	the	same	you	talk	about	chakras	and	kundalini	and	the
rising	 energy	 and	 the	planes	 and	 all	 the	kinds	of	 rubbish	people	go	on	 talking
about	these	are	just	diversions
somehow	they	are	trying	to	distract	themselves	from	their	misery
i	am	against	all	occultism	all	so-called	hidden	esoteric	secrets	 i	 teach	 the	open
secret	 be	 blissful	 that	 is	 the	 only	 true	 religion	 and	 the	 person	who	 is	 blissful
cannot	harm	anybody	the	blissful	person	is	a	benediction	to	the	whole	existence
bliss	is	our	very	nature,	it	is	our	eternal	law	in	fact	we	cannot	lose	it
at	 the	 most	 we	 can	 only	 forget	 about	 it	 so	 the	 only	 question	 is	 to	 remember
nothing	has	to	be	achieved	but	only	remembered
...	a	forgotten	language
each	child	is	born	in	deep	bliss	and	then	we	start	teaching	him	the	language	of
misery
and	 we	 burden	 him	 with	 so	 many	 things	 that	 slowly	 slowly	 his	 natural,
spontaneous	being	is	covered	with	thousands	of	layers	he	forgets	all	about	it
he	forgets	about	himself
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	function	of	the	master	is	to	remind	you	that	you	may	have	forgotten	it,	but	it
is	still	 there	just	a	little	digging	is	needed	just	as	there	are	vicious	circles	there
are	blissful	circles	too	in	a	vicious	circle	one	wrong	leads	to	another	wrong	in	a
blissful	circle	one	bliss	leads	to	another	bliss	it	is	only	a	question	of	choosing	the
right	 circle	 for	 your	 life	 people	 are	 living	 in	 vicious	 circles	 for	 example,	 if
somebody	finds	it	difficult	to	fall	asleep
he	tries	hard	to	go	into	sleep	he	tosses,	turns,	repeats	mantras	counts	sheep,	from
one	to	hundred	and	then	backwards
but	whatsoever	he	 is	doing	will	 create	more	 sleeplessness	because	 sleep	 is	not
something	that	you	can	bring	about	by	effort
now	he	 is	 getting	 into	 a	 vicious	 circle	 the	more	 he	 endeavours	 to	 bring	 about
sleep	the	more	he	will	feel	himself	awake	the	more	he	feels	himself	awake	the
more	he	will	try	new	methods	transcendental	meditation,	etcetera	to	fall	asleep
and	this	can	go	on	ad	nauseum	in	the	morning	he	will	be	far	more	tired	than	if	he
had	simply	accepted	the	fact	that	sleep	is	not	there
so	it	is	not	there	and	rested	there	was	every	possibility	he	may	have	fallen	asleep
because	he	would	not	have	created	the	vicious	circle
the	same	is	true	about	bliss,	about	everything	just	a	small	beginning
and	then	it	triggers	bigger	phenomena	my	own	observation	is	that	if	you	can	be
blissful	about	a	single	thing	in	your	life	that's	enough
and	it	will	lead	you	into	new	dimensions,	new	peaks	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
so	whatsoever	you	love,	whatsoever	you	like	do	it,	enjoy	it,	enjoy	it	totally	don't
think	about	whether	it	is	something	great	or	not
it	doesn't	matter
what	really	matters	is	your	enjoyment	if	you	can	enjoy	anything	totally	you	are
creating	a	circle	of	bliss	it	will	lead	to	new	points,	new	departures	higher	peaks
and	soon	you	will	be	surprised	that	a	small	beginning
has	brought	you	to	the	ultimate	hence	start	with	the	immediate,	whatsoever	it	is
just	sipping	a	cup	of	tea	is	enough	if	you	can	enjoy	it	totally	it	will	lead	you	to
the	 ultimate	 samadhi	 there	 are	 not	 small	 things	 and	 big	 things	 in	 life	 only
intelligent	people	and	unintelligent	people	the	intelligent	person
transforms	everything	into	bliss	and	the	unintelligent
transforms	 everything	 into	misery	 blissfulness	 has	 never	 been	 thought	 of	 as	 a
virtue	 although	 it	 is	 the	 fundamental	 virtue	 they	 have	 been	 talking	 about
character	truthfulness,	sincerity
humbleness,	compassion
service,	non-violence
and	a	thousand	and	one	things	as	virtues	but	a	very	strange	fact	is	they	all	drop
one	thing	consistently	blissfulness
no	 religion	counts	 it	 as	 a	virtue	because	 these	 so-called	 religions	cannot	 allow
people	to	be	blissful	they	want	you	to	be	miserable	and	all	their	virtues
create	more	misery	in	you	than	before	it	is	very	obvious
you	can	 find	ordinary	people	more	 joyous	 than	your	so-called	 religious	people
you	will	 find	sinners	more	 innocent	 than	your	saints	for	 the	simple	reason	 that
the	 saint	 has	 been	 cultivating	 virtues	 he	 has	 cultivated	 a	 thick	 facade	 around
himself	 like	an	 iron	wall,	 he	 lives	behind	 it	 he	 is	 imprisoned	 in	his	own	 ideas
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	is	a	prisoner	of	his	own	stupidity	i	don't	teach	any	other	virtue	because	to	me
the	 fundamental	 virtue	 is	 bliss	 everything	 else	 is	 just	 an	 aspect	 of	 it	 if	 one	 is
blissful
i	cannot	conceive	that	he	can	be	untruthful	that	is	impossible
it	is	not	in	the	very	nature	of	things	if	one	is	blissful	he	cannot	harm	he	cannot
hurt	if	one	is	blissful	he	is	bound	to	be	compassionate	inevitably
so	to	me	all	the	virtues
are	by-products	of	blissfulness	and	blissfulness	is	the	only	virtue	which	is	not	a
by-product	of	anything	else	there	are	two	kinds	of	discipline	one	that	is	imposed
from	the	outside	i	am	against	it,	it	creates	slaves	and	we	have	enough	of	slaves	in
the	world	we	need	a	few	free	spirits	to	bring	a	little	new	breeze	into	existence
to	bring	a	few	new	insights	new	splendours,	new	dimensions	i	teach	the	second
kind	of	discipline	which	arises	out	of	your	own	understanding	the	first	discipline
has	a	set	structure	the	second	discipline	is	liquid	it	changes	moment-to-moment
because	life	changes
how	 can	 you	 have	 ready-made	 answers	 to	 situations	 which	 are	 constantly
changing?
at	this	moment	one	thing	may	be	true	the	next	moment	it	may	not	be	true	at	all	in
one	situation	it	may	be	right	in	another	situation	the	same	thing	may	be	wrong
hence	 i	 say,	 be	 alert,	 be	 aware	 be	 blissful	 and	 act	 out	 of	 your	 blissfulness
awareness,	alertness,	meditativeness	rather	than	acting	out	of	fixed	principles	act
out	of	spontaneity,	naturally	respond	to	the	situation
and	 then	whatsoever	 you	do	 is	 right	 and	of	 course	 it	 is	 right	 not	 because	 it	 is
written	in	some	scripture	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	 is	 right	 because	 it	 fits	 to	 the	 situation	 it	 is	 right	 because	 it	 is	 the	 adequate
response	and	every	adequate	response	gives	tremendous	contentment	whenever
you	can	act	in	a	totally	alive	way	you	will	feel	immense	fulfilment	following	it
and	that	is	bliss
pleasure	is	momentary
happiness	is	a	little	more	than	momentary	but	not	much
the	difference	is	only	of	degrees	it	lasts	a	little	longer	than	pleasure	but	sooner	or
later	it	ends	bliss	is	eternal;	it	begins	but	it	never	ends	to	know	bliss	is	to	know
the	ultimate	fabric	of	existence	and	that	is	our	longest	desire	that	is	our	search	--
knowingly,	unknowingly	everybody	is	searching	for	it	unless	we	have	found	the
eternal	we	will	be	homeless
only	the	eternal	can	suffice	less	than	that	won't	do
so	 pleasures	 one	 can	 have	 but	 soon	 one	 becomes	 fed	 up,	 tired,	 bored	 they
become	repetitive
happiness	one	can	have
but	how	long	can	one	go	on	playing	with	toys?
beautiful,	 but	 toys	 are	 toys	 one	 needs	 something	 more	 substantial	 more
nourishing	--	and	that's	what	bliss	is	and	the	miracle	is	 that	 it	 is	already	within
you	you	have	not	 to	go	 anywhere	 to	 find	 it	 in	 fact	 just	 the	opposite	has	 to	be
done	you	have	to	pull	yourself	from	everywhere	so	for	few	moments	at	least	you
can	be	within	yourself	 that's	what	 i	 call	meditation	withdrawing	yourself	 from
the	whole	world	 for	 a	 few	moments,	 just	 to	 rest	 and	 relax	 in	 the	very	pool	of
your	 consciousness	 once	 you	 have	 started	 tasting	 the	 joy	 of	 that	 rest	 you	 are
coming	closer	 to	home,	 to	 the	 eternal	 life	 can	 either	be	 a	 tale	 told	by	 an	 idiot
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
or	it	can	be	a	tale	told	by	a	buddha	it	all	depends	on	you
if	you	remain	asleep,	unconscious	your	life	will	be	just	accidental	like	driftwood
at	the	mercy	of	the	winds	and	the	waves	meaningless
drifting	towards	death,	becoming	every	day	more	and	more	gloomy	and	dark	but
if	you	become	a	little	alert	and	awakened	the	quality	of	life	immediately	changes
then	it	is	no	more	accidental	it	starts	having	a	subtle	meaning	to	it	that	meaning
is	bliss	 and	 then	 life	 starts	 turning	 into	a	beautiful	 story	a	parable	of	 immense
dimensions	then	a	single	man's	life	contains	all	the	scriptures	of	the	world	then
one	can	read	the	whole	story	of	existence	within	one's	own	heartbeat	but	for	that,
one	condition	has	 to	be	fulfilled	one	has	 to	become	a	 little	more	awake	a	 little
more	conscious
blissfulness	grows
in	 the	 same	 proportion	 as	 consciousness	 it	 is	 always	 symmetrical	 to
consciousness	if	one	is	miserable	that	shows	he	is	unconscious	if	one	is	blissful
that	shows	he	is	conscious	if	one	is	absolutely	blissful	that	shows	one	has	arrived
the	only	thing	that	can	be	called	divine	is	blissfulness
the	 only	 thing	 that	 proves	 the	 existence	 of	 godliness	 is	 blissfulness	 no	 other
argument	can	prove	it	there	have	been	many	arguments	for	the	existence	of	the
divine	but	they	can	all	be	refuted,	they	have	been	refuted	man	has	not	been	able
to	find	a	single	argument	which	is	irrefutable	but	there	have	been	a	few	people	in
the	world	 the	 very	 salt	 of	 the	 earth	whose	 existence	 cannot	 be	 refuted	whose
presence	cannot	be	refuted,	whose	presence	leaves	such	an	impact	of	blissfulness
that	even	if	you	want	to	deny	it	you	cannot	deny	it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
in	spite	of	yourself	you	have	to	accept	and	that	something	more
is	what	we	are	trying	to	impart	here	that	something	more,	that	quality,	xyz	i	call
it	 blissfulness	 --	 it	 can	 only	 be	 imparted	 hence	 the	 beauty	 of	 the	 love	 affair
between	a	master	and	a	disciple	it	is	simply	a	love	affair	it	is	the	coming	together
of	two	hearts	in	deep	trust,	in	communion	so	close,	so	open	and	vulnerable	that
the	flame	from	one	heart
can	jump	into	the	other	heart	and	suddenly	the	unlit	lamp	is	lit	and	the	miracle
has	happened	it	happens	suddenly
it	is	not	a	gradual	process	at	all	pleasure	needs	two	persons	happiness	also	needs
duality	bliss	does	not	need	two	persons	or	duality	one	is	enough	alone
it	happens	in	one's	deepest	aloneness	hence	it	is	called
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
in	pleasure	you	will	need	a	partner	if	you	enjoy	food	you	will	need	food	if	you
enjoy	music	 then	music	 is	 needed	 you	 have	 to	 depend	 on	 something	 and	 any
dependence	hurts
and	any	dependence	becomes	 a	bondage	 and	one	 cannot	 forgive	 the	person	 to
whom	one	becomes	dependent	that's	why	lovers	quarrel
the	basic	cause	of	quarrel	 is	 that	 they	 feel	 they	are	encaged	by	each	other	 that
they	cannot	be	happy	without	each	other	 that	hurts,	 that	hurts	very	much	that	 i
have	become	dependent,	addicted	it	is	like	drug	addiction
one	feels	the	slavery
and	 how	 can	 one	 be	 blissful	 in	 slavery	 we	 have	 to	 search	 and	 seek	 within
ourselves	 a	 space	where	bliss	 happens	but	 independently	 it	 needs	nothing	 else
for	it	to	happen	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	happens	as	our	own	innermost	source	that's	why	bliss	brings	with	it	freedom,
truth,	 and	a	 sense	of	 immense	grandeur,	 splendour	one	never	gets	 fed	up	with
bliss	 and	 the	 blissful	 person	becomes	 capable	 of	 living	with	 other	 people	 also
blissfully	 because	 now	 he	 is	 no	 longer	 dependent	 on	 anything	 he	 can	 enjoy
pleasures,	he	can	enjoy	happinesses	because	he	knows	that	he	has	reached	to	a
state	which	is	always	available	to	him	where	he	can	always	go
leaving	the	whole	world	behind	he	has	entered
into	that	inner	circle	of	his	being	where	nobody	can	interfere	where	no	bondage
exists
where	there	is	only	pure	music	and	poetry	and	dance	and	celebration
anahato	is	one	of	the	most	beautiful	names	it	is	very	significant
only	those	who	have	known	that	state	are	the	buddhas
so	try	to	hear
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
it	is	there;	one	just	has	to	become	a	little	silent	and	it	is	heard
once	heard,	it	is	forever	yours	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#9
Chapter	title:	None
9	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103095
ShortTitle:	CLAPP09
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	most	significant	 thing	 to	 remember	 is	 that	contentment	and	satisfaction	are
not	synonymous
satisfaction	is	a	false	coin	it	pretends	to	be	contentment	but	it	 is	not	it	 is	really
just	the	opposite	of	contentment	one	feels	discontented
but	to	remain	in	discontentment	hurts	to	cover	that	wound	one	creates	a	pseudo
climate	 around	 oneself	 of	 satisfaction	 and	 that's	 what	 the	 so-called	 religious
people	have	been	doing	 for	centuries	 this	 is	not	 the	way	 to	 find	 truth	 the	only
way	 to	 find	 truth	 is	 to	 go	 through	 your	 discontent	 without	 hiding	 it,	 without
escaping	 from	 it	 the	 very	 understanding	 of	 your	 discontentment	 brings
contentment
and	then	there	is	a	totally	new	being,	a	new	birth	the	noble	one	is	born
satisfaction	 is	 a	 deception	 contentment	 is	 a	 resurrection	 but	 before	 the
resurrection	 can	 happen	 one	 has	 to	 go	 through	 crucifixion	 if	 one	 avoids
crucifixion
then	 one	will	 be	 avoiding	 finally	 the	 ultimate	 rejoicing	 of	 being	 resurrected	 i
teach	contentment	not	satisfaction	and	the	way	to	contentment	is	to	encounter	all
your	 discontents	 without	 any	 fear,	 without	 any	 hiding	 to	 know	 your
discontentment	in	its	total	nudity	is	the	beginning	of	a	new	life	man	can	create	in
two	ways	either	out	of	a	state	of	discontentment	frustration,	failure
or	through	a	state	of	absolute	contentment	the	quality	of	the	creativity	is	going	to
be	 totally	 different	 picasso	may	 be	 a	 great	 painter	 but	 his	 painting	 shows	 his
discontentment	with	life	not	contentment
it	shows	his	innermost	insanity	as	if	he	has	vomited	his	insanity	on	the	canvas	of
course	he	is	a	great	artist	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	whatsoever	he	is	creating	is	a	little	bit	insane	he	is	simply	catharting
it	helps	him,	he	becomes	unburdened	but	it	doesn't	help	others	they	will	become
burdened
the	whole	of	modern	art	is	rooted	in	discontentment	hence	it	has	lost	the	ancient
glory,	the	classic	glory	of	creativity
there	 is	 a	 vast	 difference	 between	 the	 people	 who	made	 the	 taj	 mahal	 or	 the
temples	of	khajuraho	or	the	pyramids	of	egypt
and	 the	people	who	 are	 creating	modern	 art	 the	gap	 seems	 to	be	unbridgeable
because	the	sources	are	different	it	is	said	in	zen
that	before	you	can	create	you	have	to	come	to	a	point	of	absolute	silence	then
whatsoever	 you	do	will	 bring	 something	of	 the	 divine	 into	 the	world	 you	will
become	a	vehicle
then	 it	will	not	be	 just	a	mind	product	 it	will	be	something	 transcendental	and
that's	my	effort	here
i	am	all	for	creativity
but	not	this	kind	of	creativity	that	is	going	around	the	world,	neurotic,	psychotic
i	would	like	my	sannyasins	to	become	so	peaceful	so	silent
so	utterly	 at	 home	with	 existence	 that	 there	 is	 no	 complaint	 in	 their	 being	but
only	gratitude
out	 of	 that	 gratitude	 flows	 real	 creativity	 and	 that	 is	 the	 greatest	 joy	 in	 life	 to
contribute	something	to	existence	to	make	it	a	little	more	beautiful	than	you	had
found	it
to	 spread	 a	 few	 more	 smiles	 in	 the	 world	 to	 make	 the	 world	 more	 blessed,
blissful	in	a	state	of	better	celebration,	festivity	if	this	can	be	done	then	the	man
is	 religious	 to	 me	 religion	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 churches	 and	 temples	 and
rituals	it	has	something	to	do
with	the	energy	called	creativity	but	before	it	can	happen
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
one	has	to	prepare	one's	being	and	contentment	is	the	preparation	be	contented	--
whatsoever	is,	is	good	whatsoever	is,	is	perfect,	don't	ask	for	more	relax	into	it,
rejoice	in	it	and	you	will	be	surprised
the	more	vou	relax,	the	more	you	rest	in	it	the	more	you	become	insightful	of	the
mysterious	 of	 the	 miraculous	 that	 surrounds	 you	 a	 moment	 comes	 when	 you
simply	disappear	in	your	own	immense	contentment	and	when	you	are	not,	god
is	when	you	are	not,	creativity	is	to	me	god	is	not	a	creator	but	only
the	 energy	 called	 creativity	 the	 cowardly	 is	 always	 complaining	 to	 complain,
intelligence	 is	not	needed	 to	complain,	 courage	 is	not	needed	 to	complain	 is	 a
very	mediocre	activity	anybody	can	do	it
hence	everybody	is	doing	it	but	to	be	contented,	to	feel	grateful,	to	feel	blessed
great	 intelligence	 is	 required	 courage	 is	 required,	 insight	 is	 required	 and	 the
moment	you	start	looking	into	the	depths	of	life
a	great	surprise	arises
you	cannot	believe	it,	it	is	incredible	what	has	been	given	is	simply	beyond	our
comprehension
and	we	have	not	earned	it	either	it	is	a	sheer	gift	from	the	whole	to	see	life,	love,
freedom,	joy	as	gifts	from	the	divine
makes	one	feel	contented
and	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 inner	 contentment	 is	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 a	 real	 temple
temples	don't	exist	on	the	outside	one	has	to	become	a	temple	and	the	only	way
to	become	a	temple	is	to	create	in	your	interiority	an	immense	gratitude	for	all
that	has	happened	to	you	for	all	that	is	happening	to	you	and	it	 is	incalculable,
immeasurable	but	certainly	one	has	to	be	courageous	for	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
courageous
because	 the	whole	 crowd	 is	 complaining	 it	 is	 always	 asking	 for	more	 it	 needs
guts	 to	say,	 i	don't	ask	for	more	that	 in	fact	whatsoever	 is	given	to	me	is	more
than	i	could	have	asked	for	in	the	first	place	and	from	that	very	moment
a	transformation	starts	happening	your	life	becomes
more	and	more	attuned	to	existence	it	becomes	more	and	more	a	dance	and	that
has	to	be	the	flavour	of	my	sannyasins	a	deep	inner	contentment
and	on	the	outside
the	manifestation	of	 that	 contentment	 in	 celebration,	 in	 celebrating	 the	day-to-
day	life
the	moment-to-moment	life
the	ordinary	life
once	you	are	ready
to	celebrate	 the	ordinary	life	 it	 is	no	more	ordinary	at	all	 there	are	people	who
think	that	unless	you	attain	to	the	ultimate	bliss	you	cannot	be	contented
they	have	taken	a	wrong	standpoint	from	the	very	beginning
they	will	remain	discontented	forever	contentment
has	to	be	the	first	step	of	the	journey	contentment
simply	means	a	non-egoistic	attitude	the	ego	is	always	asking	for	more	it	always
needs	more	and	more	decorations	it	is	never	satisfied
it	is	not	in	its	nature	to	be	satisfied	the	ego	is	a	beggar
and	 the	 ego	 can	 go	 on	 begging	 in	 this	world	 it	 can	 start	 begging	 in	 the	 other
world	too	a	sannyasin	has	to	start	as	an	emperor	not	as	a	beggar
that	has	to	be	his	first	step	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	that's	what	i	mean	by	contentment	the	moment	you	say
i	am	immensely	happy	with	whatsoever	is	with	the	stars	and	the	clouds	and	the
trees	and	the	people	and	with	myself	i	have	no	grudge,	no	guilt	no	desire	to	be
somebody	else	no	desire	to	be	somewhere	else	i	rejoice	whatsoever	is	the	case.
immediately
you	are	transformed	into	an	emperor	and	then	bliss	is	not	far	away	in	fact	it	will
come	following	you	you	need	not	search	for	it	anutosh	means	contentment
dhyan	means	meditation
they	 are	 equivalent,	 synonymous	 there	 exists	 a	 subtle	 synchronicity	 between
them	if	you	are	contented
there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 meditate	 at	 all	 contentment	 will	 become	 your	 meditation
naturally,	spontaneously
or	vice	versa	--	if	you	are	meditative,	silent	then	contentment	will	become	a	by-
product	one	can	begin	from	either	end	it	is	in	fact	one	phenomenon	two	ends	of
the	same	line
the	easiest	is	to	begin	with	contentment	because	there	is	so	much	to	be	contented
with	the	whole	universe	provides	millions	of	opportunities	to	be	contented	with
those	who	cannot	do	it
they	have	to	start	by	meditating	meditation	is	an	effort
you	 have	 to	 sit	 silently,	 watchfully,	 relaxedly	 to	 calm	 down	 your	 mind,	 your
whole	inner	noise	but	if	one	starts	with	contentment	it	is	far	more	simple
looking	at	the	sky	full	of	stars	suddenly	you	feel	so	contented	--
what	more	can	there	be?
it	 cannot	be	 improved	upon	 the	 starry	night	 is	 so	breathtaking	 the	 sunset	 for	a
moment	stops	your	heartbeat	a	bird	on	the	wing	and	suddenly	your	mind	is	not
there
these	 are	 natural	 glimpses	 of	 meditation	 my	 suggestion	 is	 watch	 life	 and	 its
beauties	get	more	and	more	merged	into	existence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	meditation	will	come	naturally	if	it	is	not	possible	then	only	make	an	effort,
a	deliberate	effort	 to	be	silent	but	 that	has	always	 to	be	 the	second	thing	when
the	easier	course	 is	available	don't	 follow	the	arduous;	 it	 is	unnecessary	follow
the	watercourse	way	there	is	no	need	to	go	upstream,	go	with	the	river	and	this
very	moment	you	can	feel	contentment	if	i	say	meditate
you	will	have	to	decide	when	to	start	tomorrow,	tomorrow	morning	fix	the	alarm
and	tomorrow	morning...
but	if	you	understand
what	i	am	saying	about	contentment	then	it	is	there,	right	now	this	very	moment
is	so	full,	so	overwhelmingly	full	that	one	can	easily	get	lost	in	it	anutoshi	means
one	 who	 is	 absolutely	 contented	 so	 i	 am	 not	 leaving	 anything	 for	 you	 i	 am
simply	declaring
you	can	relax	into	it,	nothing	has	to	be	done	the	very	idea	of	doing
is	an	invention	of	the	mind	otherwise	all	is	happening	but	mind	is	so	cunning
that	even	when	things	are	happening	it	goes	on	translating	them	as	if	he	is	doing
them
for	example	people	say	i	am	breathing	you	see	the	stupidity?
nobody	is	breathing;	breathing	is	happening	if	people	were	breathing
then	it	would	be	impossible	for	 them	to	die	 they	may	continue	breathing	death
may	 go	 on	 knocking	 on	 the	 door	 and	 they	 may	 go	 on	 doing	 the	 dynamic
meditation	then	what	to	do?
they	may	even	start	breathing	faster	we	are	not	breathing
in	fact	just	the	opposite	is	the	case	we	are	being	breathed,	existence	is	breathing
us	and	that	is	true	about	everything	when	you	are	hungry	you	are	not	hungry	it
has	nothing	to	do	with	you,	it	is	simply	there	and	when	you	eat	and	you	digest	it
has	nothing	to	do	with	you	it	is	not	that	you	are	digesting	it	just	try	for	twenty-
four	hours	to	digest	food	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	you	will	have	indigestion	remember	constantly	where	the	food	has	gone	now
and	where	it	is	moving
and	go	on	touching	your	belly	and	find	places	now	it	must	be	here
and	now	the	bread	is	being	churned	into	blood	you	will	go	crazy	within	twenty-
four	hours	everything	is	happening
that	is	one	of	the	fundamentals	of	my	approach	to	life
we	are	not	doers
we	are	just	part	of	an	immense	happening	so	all	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is	to
relax,	 rejoice,	be	 in	 tune	 that's	what	 i	mean	by	absolute	contentment	 then	each
moment	 brings	 so	 much	 ecstasy	 and	 the	 moment	 one	 feels	 contentment	 all
problems	disappear
as	if	they	had	never	existed	in	the	first	place	uncontainable
so	immense
that	one	can	simply	dance	 in	sheer	gratitude	my	sannyasins	are	not	dancing	 to
attain	 to	 god	 they	 are	 not	 dancing	 to	 attain	 to	 heavenly	 pleasures	 they	 are
dancing	just	out	of	sheer	contentment	there	is	nothing	else	to	do	it	is	not	a	means
to	some	end	in	fact	it	is	the	recognition	that	all	is	already	the	case
and	we	are	here
just	to	celebrate	it
we	are	asleep
our	 sleep	 consists	 of	 discontentments	 the	 only	 way	 to	 wake	 up	 is	 to	 drop
discontentments	and	it	is	very	easy	to	drop	them	because	they	are	futile
even	if	you	carry	them
you	will	never	be	able	to	fulfil	them
]nobody	has	ever	been	able	to	fulfil	his	discontentments	it	is	an	exercise	in	sheer
futility	so	the	intelligent	person
simply	drops	the	whole	trip	he	does	not	waste	his	present	for	any	future	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	does	not	sacrifice	this	moment	for	another	moment
who	knows	about	the	next	moment?
in	fact	the	tomorrow	never	comes	so	why	waste	the	time	that	is	available	to	you
for	something	which	is	not	going	to	come?
but	the	discontented	man	lives	int	he	future	and	the	contented	man	lives	in	the
present	and	to	live	in	the	present	is	to	be	awakened	there	is	no	other	secret	to	it
to	live	now
to	live	here	is	to	be	awakened	the	unconscious	person	lives	in	dreams	he	goes	on
creating	new	dreams	when	old	dreams	fail
he	immediately	substitutes	new	dreams	for	them	his	life	is	made	not	of	realities
but	only	of	desires	the	same	stuff	as	dreams	are	made	of	he	lives	in	a	cocoon	of
false	 notions	 hallucinations,	 desires,	 expectations	 and	 this	 is	 simply	 a	 way	 of
committing	suicide	a	sannyasin	has	to	come	out	of	the	cocoon	he	has	to	drop	all
nonsense	of	 the	mind	and	be	in	contact	with	reality,	with	that	which	is	and	the
reality	 is	 really	fulfilling	 just	a	single	moment	of	 the	contact	with	reality	 is	 far
more	valuable
than	the	whole	eternity	of	dreaming	it	is	so	nourishing
the	method	to	come	in	contact	with	reality	is	consciousness
because	it	is	unconsciousness	that	prevents	us	so	the	whole	work	of	a	sannyasin
is	to	move	from	unconscious	states	to	conscious	states
slowly	 slowly	 changing	 every	 fibre	 of	 one's	 being	 from	 unconsciousness	 to
consciousness	and	even	 if	you	can	change	a	 single	moment	 then	you	have	got
the	key
you	 can	 change	 your	 whole	 life	 only	 the	 first	 moment	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 difficult
because	of	our	old	habits
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
for	 that	 first	 moment	 to	 happen	 a	 certain	 energy	 field	 is	 needed	 where	many
people	are	trying	to	become	conscious	their	very	fervour
creates	a	subtle	whirlpool	of	energy	around	you	it	starts	moving	you
that's	the	whole	purpose	of	a	buddhafield	that's	the	purpose	of	this	commune	so
many	people	trying	to	be	loving	trying	to	be	meditative,	trying	to	be	alert	create
a	 certain	 vibe	 which	 can	 possess	 anybody	 and	 once	 you	 have	 tasted	 a	 single
moment	then	there	is	no	problem
then	 you	 can	move	 on	 your	 own	 the	 experience	 of	 contentment	 is	 not	 a	 dull
experience
it	is	one	of	the	most	brilliant	experiences	of	life	just	shining	like	the	sun
hence	your	so-called	saints	who	look	dull,	stupid,	dead	are	giving	enough	proof
that	 they	 have	 not	 tasted	 contentment	 they	 are	 simply	 suffocating	 themselves
they	have	created
a	 certain	kind	of	 satisfaction	 around	 themselves	but	 satisfaction	 is	 always	dull
because	it	is	a	fabricated	thing	a	manufactured	thing
it	has	no	life,	 it	has	no	song	to	 it	but	when	contentment	explodes	 thousands	of
songs	grow	in	you	so	that	has	to	be	the	criterion	of	whether	you	are	on	the	right
road	 or	 not	whether	 you	 are	moving	 in	 the	 right	 direction	 or	 not	 if	 your	 song
starts	becoming	deeper	if	your	joy	becomes	more	and	more	intense	if	your	life
starts	taking	a	tremendous	passionate	love	quality	to	it	then	that	is	enough	proof,
ample	proof	that	you	are	coming	closer	to	home	there	is	a	music	which	is	heard
only	when	you	have	reached
the	innermost	core	of	your	being	utterly	contented
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	not	ordinary	music
it	is	not	heard	by	the	ears	it	is	heard	by	the	soul	itself	but	it	is	overwhelming
there	 is	 nothing	 bigger	 than	 that	 the	 moment	 one	 has	 experienced	 it	 one	 has
experienced	 the	vastest	expanse	of	space	even	 the	whole	sky	seems	 to	be	very
small	compared	to	it
the	millions	of	stars	are	nothing	compared	to	the	inner	light	and	the	expanding
universe	which	goes	on	expanding
every	moment	with	infinite	speed	is	nothing	compared	to	the	inner	expansion	it
can	only	be	called	music	there	is	no	other	word
which	can	adequately	describe	it	the	zen	people	call	it
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
it	has	to	be	heard
without	hearing	it	life	is	futile,	meaningless	one	can	only	vegetate	but	one	cannot
really	live	life	begins	only	with
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
then	for	the	first	time	you	know	what	it	is	all	about
before	it	you	were	just	like	a	robot	or	a	sleepwalker	after	it	your	eyes	are	open
your	being	is	open	and	that	opening	is	the	opening	of	the	eternal	temple	of	god	it
takes	 you	 to	 the	 innermost	 shrine	 of	 existence	 and	 it	 reveals	 to	 you	 all	 that	 is
mysterious	it	makes	you	capable	of	releasing	your	own	hidden	splendour
and	we	are	all	carrying	a	world,	a	beyond	within	and	unless	it	is	released	one	can
never	 feel	 at	 ease	 something	 will	 go	 on	 missing	 sannyas	 is	 only	 a	 scientific
endeavour	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
to	 release	 the	 hidden	 splendour	 of	 your	 being	 to	 bring	 that	 which	 you	 have
contained	all	along	to	fulfilment
to	flowering
it	is	an	invitation	for	the	spring	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#10
Chapter	title:	None
10	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103105
ShortTitle:	CLAPP10
Audio:
No
Video:
No
meditation	transforms	you
into	a	beloved	of	 the	whole	existence	as	 the	meditator	becomes	centred,	silent,
aware	the	whole	existence	starts	converging	upward	the	same	world	but	no	more
the	same	before	it	was	cold,	alien
now	it	is	cosy,	a	home
a	man	without	meditation
lives	in	the	world	as	a	stranger	as	you	enter	meditation
you	enter	a	love	affair	with	existence	and	for	love	everything	is	possible	even	the
impossible	is	not	impossible	all	that	is	needed	is
a	 deep,	 profound	 silence	 in	 your	 being	 that	 becomes	 a	 magnetic	 pull	 then
whatsoever	is	beautiful	in	existence	starts	moving	towards	you
meditation	creates	gravitation	for	truth	for	beauty,	for	love
for	 freedom,	 for	 godliness	 for	 all	 that	 is	 really	 valuable	 one	 need	 not	 go
searching	for	anything	one	has	simply	to	rest	in	one's	being	and	all	that	is	needed
follows	in	its	own	course	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
meditation	is	the	only	magic	that	has	yet	been	known
and	i	don't	think	it	can	ever	be	transcended	there	will	not	be	any	magic	greater
than	meditation	meditation	cannot	be	a	logical	enquiry	you	cannot	study	it	from
the	outside	it	is	not	an	object	hence	no	scientific	enquiry	is	possible	by	its	very
nature	 it	 is	a	matter	of	 love	not	of	 logic	 the	head	is	 incapable	of	meditation	so
those	who	start	thinking	about	meditation	studying	meditation
go	on	missing	the	point
they	are	starting	from	a	wrong	space	their	very	first	step	has	gone	wrong	and	the
first	step	is	the	most	important	step	it	is	almost	half	the	journey	because	the	next
step	follows	the	first	the	next	step	is	implied	in	the	first	so	i	want	my	sannyasins
to	be	reminded	again	and	again
to	let	meditation	be	your	love	affair	don't	think	about	it
don't	philosophise	about	it	take	a	plunge
just	as	one	falls	in	love,	fall	into	meditation	then	all	the	mysteries	are	yours	just	a
moment's	thought
and	you	are	thousands	of	miles	away	from	it	no	thought	and	you	are	it
one	cannot	expect,	one	cannot	desire	one	cannot	demand
as	far	as	meditation	is	concerned	expecting,	demanding,	desiring	are	barriers	one
can	 simply	wait,	 utterly	 relaxed	 it	 comes	 but	 it	 comes	 like	 a	 sudden	 breeze	 it
comes	and	refreshes	you	it	comes	and	rejuvenates	you	it	comes	and	it	transforms
you	but	it	does	not	come	according	to	your	ideas	it	does	not	come	according	to
your	prejudices	that	is	something	significant	never	to	be	forgotten
because	the	whole	functioning	of	our	mind	is	such	that	whatsoever	we	do	we	do
with	a	motive	if	we	are	meditating	then	we	look	sideways	looking	at	the	clock,
expecting	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
now	it	is	going	to	happen
it	is	time	enough
it	should	happen	now
i	have	been	meditating	 for	 three	days	or	 three	months	or	 three	years	how	long
can	one	go	on	meditating?
enough-is	enough
if	 all	 these	 things	 are	 going	 on	 then	 you	 are	 creating	 a	 barricade	 meditation
should	be	done	for	its	own	joy	it	is	an	end	unto	itself
not	a	means	to	something	else	and	then	the	miracle	happens	but	you	cannot	do	it,
it	happens	it	comes	like	a	breeze
it	surprises	you,	it	wakes	you	up	for	a	moment	you	miss	a	heartbeat	because	the
guest	 has	 come	 so	 unexpectedly	 and	 it	 is	 so	 glorious,	 so	 fulfilling	 so
tremendously	blissful
its	whole	beauty	depends	on	 its	unexpectedness,	 its	surprise	millions	of	people
have	meditated	but	very	few	have	reached
for	the	simple	reason	that	only	very	few	have	meditated	for	its	sheer	joy
meditation	is	a	state	of	suspendedness	a	state	of	interval
before	meditation
you	 live	 in	 the	 darkness	 of	 the	 mind	 with	 all	 its	 desires,	 greeds,	 angers,
jealousies	 after	 meditation	 you	 live	 in	 the	 world	 of	 bliss	 benediction,	 truth,
freedom	but	there	is	a	gap	between	the	two	when	one	is	in	fact	nowhere	neither
here	nor	there
and	that	is	the	most	significant	passage	the	mind	tries	to	go	back
because	 that	 twilight	 zone	 is	 frightening	 because	 suddenly	 all	 your	 ideas,	 all
your	notions	your	very	ego	is	getting	lost	a	fear	grips	one,	one
wants	to	fall	back	and	cling	to	all	the	old	things	at	least	there	was	something	to
cling	to	meditation	is	emptiness
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
hence	the	master	is	needed	the	most	significant	function	of	the	master	is	in	the
twilight	zone
because	when	the	disciple	starts	falling	back	which	is	a	natural	thing
nothing	extraordinary	about	it	it	happens	to	everybody
because	the	known,	the	familiar	was	at	least	the	known	and	the	familiar	and	now
one	 is	 simply	 melting	 and	 one	 knows	 not	 what	 is	 going	 to	 happen	 next	 it	 is
almost	like	death
the	death	 of	 the	 old	 and	 the	 new	 is	 not	 born	yet	 that	 is	 the	moment	when	 the
master	can	go	on	holding	your	hand	and	he	can	say	don't	be	worried	--	the	dawn
is	not	far	away	just	look	at	the	east,	the	sun	is	rising	sometimes	the	master	has	to
devise	things	just	 to	keep	you	occupied	in	the	twilight	zone	some	toys	to	cling
to,	some	methods,	some	words	so	you	are	not	utterly	empty	as	the	twilight	zone
passes	by	you	will	be	able	 to	see	 that	 these	are	 toys	and	 that	 they	have	served
their	function	mind	is	full
full	of	all	that	is	ugly,	it	is	full	of	hell	and	the	soul	is	full
full	of	all	that	is	beautiful	it	is	full	of	heaven
between	 these	 two	 fullnesses	 there	 is	 a	 gap	 of	 utter	 emptiness	 that's	 what
meditation	is
it	 takes	you	 from	 the	 fullness	of	 the	ugly	mind	 to	 the	 fullness	of	 the	beautiful
soul	but	there	is	no	way	to	escape	the	gap	one	has	to	pass	through	it	and	if	one
knows	one	can	pass	joyously	then	one	can	even	enjoy	the	interval	its	silence,	its
emptiness,	 its	 nothingness	meditation	 can	be	 thought	of	 either	 as	 silence	or	 as
song	it	can	be	thought	of	as	silence	if	you	compare	it	with	the	mind	compared	to
the	mind	 it	 is	 silence	but	compared	 to	 the	soul	 it	 is	a	 song	 it	 is	not	 something
dead,	it	is	very	alive	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	not	the	silence	of	the	cemetery	but	the	silence
of	the	high	altitudes	of	mountains	in	that	silence
if	 you	 have	 enough	 sensitivity	 you	 can	 decipher	many	 songs	 all	 the	 creativity
that	 has	 happened	 in	 the	 world	 has	 come	 through	 meditation	 knowingly	 or
unknowingly
all	 the	 poetry,	 all	 the	music,	 all	 the	 dance	 is	 possible	 only	 if	 something	 deep
inside	 you	 starts	 bursting	 forth	 in	 celebration	 you	 have	 to	 come	 out	 of
seriousness	there	is	no	need	to	be	so	serious	no	need	to	be	so	sacred,	holy	learn
to	 laugh,	 learn	 to	 sing	 and	 that	 will	 help	 you	 immensely	 because	 the	 whole
existence	is	a	celebration	if	we	are	serious	then	we	are	not	part	of	the	universe
the	old	proverb	is	right
if	you	laugh	the	whole	world	laughs	with	you	it	you	weep,	if	you	cry
you	weep	and	cry	alone
people	have	their	own	problems	more	than	are	needed
who	wants	to	participate
with	someone	who	is	sad	and	serious?
so	make	it	a	point	to	drop	your	seriousness	wherever	it	exists
and	it	can	be	dropped	because	it	is	unnatural	no	child	is	born	serious,	it	is	taught
by	others	and	my	function	here	is	to	help	you	to	become	a	child	again
nobody	has	ever	defined	meditation	as	a	sense	of	humour
but	to	me	the	sense	of	humour	is	the	most	significant	religious	quality	the	person
who	cannot	 laugh	cannot	pray	either	 the	person	who	cannot	see	existence	with
all	 its	 incredible	 beauty	 and	 also	 with	 all	 its	 infinite	 ridiculousness	 cannot
understand	life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	life	is	god,	there	is	no	other	god	the	more	you	become	silent	the	more	you
will	be	able	to	see	things	in	clear	perspective
and	 then	 you	will	 be	 surprised	 that	 things	 are	 so	 incredibly	 beautiful	 that	 the
whole	 existence	 is	 giggling	 except	 foolish	man	 and	 his	 foolish	 saints	who	 are
sitting	 like	 mummies	 dead,	 holding	 themself	 together	 afraid	 that	 if	 they	 lose
control	if	they	start	laughing
they	will	 lose	all	 respectability	 i	don't	 teach	my	sannyasins	 to	be	 respectable	 i
teach	them	to	be	alive
whatsoever	it	costs	be	totally	alive	even	if	you	have	to	risk	your	life	it	is	worth	it
in	fact	when	a	man	has	something	to	die	for	only	then	has	he	something	to	live
for	always	look	at	the	humorous	side	of	existence	and	you	will	start	getting	more
and	more	in	tune	with	yourself	and	with	the	world	the	sense	of	humour	makes	a
man	very	ordinary	but	 to	me	that	ordinariness	 is	 in	fact	 the	most	extraordinary
phenomenon	 the	 desire	 to	 be	 extraordinary	 is	 very	 ordinary	 everybody	 wants
that
to	relax	into	ordinariness	is	a	very	rare	phenomenon,	very	extraordinary	and	the
sense	of	humour	brings	you	many	gifts	 it	 is	not	only	a	question	of	 laughing	at
others	more	fundamentally	it	is	a	question	of	laughing	at	oneself	too	if	you	see
your	own	life	and	its	ridiculousness	you	will	start	laughing
what	have	you	been	doing?	what	are	you	doing?
and	 if	you	can	start	 laughing	at	your	own	actions	a	 tremendous	 relief	happens
and	when	you	can	laugh	at	yourself	you	cannot	be	hard	on	others	your	so-called
saints	are	very	hard	on	others	just	for	small	things
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
for	example,	somebody	loves	smoking	he	has	to	be	thrown	into	hell	 this	 is	 too
much...	and	for	eternity	he	will	be	thrown	alive	into	hellfire	and	for	eternity	he
will	 have	 to	 burn	 there	 just	 because	 he	 was	 smoking	 so	 he	 has	 to	 smoke	 for
eternity	now	and	what	was	so	wrong	with	it?
it	is	everybody's	right
if	 one	wants	 to	 take	 smoke	 in	 and	 out	 it	 is	 nobody	 else's	 business,	 nothing	 is
wrong	in	it	but	our	saints	have	been	too	hard	for	the	simple	reason
that	they	had	no	sense	of	humour	they	created	hell
i	cannot	conceive	hell
the	 whole	 of	 existence	 is	 paradise	 your	 silence	 should	 not	 only	 be	 silence	 it
should	also	be	laughter	it	should	also	be	a	dance
it	should	have	many	dimensions	to	it	and	if	you	meet	god	anytime	tell	him	a	few
jokes	and	he	will	be	far	happier	with	you	than	with	jesus	carrying	his	cross	than
with	your	saints	going	to	him	with	sad	faces	friedrich	nietzsche	said	god	is	dead
but	i	suspect	he	must	be	hiding	from	the	so-called	saints
just	look	at	your	saints	--	they	are	such	a	torture	if	he	is	dead
then	 it	 cannot	 have	 been	 a	 normal	 death	 he	 must	 have	 committed	 suicide
surrounded	 by	 all	 kinds	 of	 saints	 particularly	 the	 christian	 saints	 and	 all	 the
popes	and	all	the	priests...
i	cannot	conceive	god	alive	in	such	wrong	company	god	needs	better	company,
he	 deserves	 it	 i	 am	 preparing	 better	 company	 for	 god	 meditation	 is	 the	 last
boundary	 beyond	 which	 nothing	 can	 be	 said	 beyond	 which	 starts	 the
inexpressible	beyond	which	is	the	truth
but	you	can	reach	to	that	beyond	only	through	meditation
meditation	is	an	antidote
mind	is	the	disease
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
meditation	 is	 the	 antidote	 the	 moment	 mind	 is	 dropped	 meditation	 is	 also
dropped	you	have	come	to	the	ultimate	boundary	now	begins	real	experiencing
so	remember
my	people	are	not	to	cling	to	meditation	it	is	only	medicine
in	fact	the	words	meditation	and	medicine	come	from	the	same	root:
that	which	cures
that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 the	 root	 word	 medicine	 cures	 your	 physical	 diseases
meditation	 cures	 your	 psychological	 diseases	 but	 a	medicine	 is	 needed	only	 if
the	 disease	 is	 there	 when	 the	 disease	 is	 finished	 medicine	 is	 of	 no	 use	 there
comes	a	point	in	the	life	of	a	meditator	when	he	drops	meditation
because	the	mind	is	no	more	there	and	there	is	no	need	to	meditate	at	all	that	is
the	ultimate	line
the	moment	mind	and	meditation	are	both	dropped	you	have	come	home
for	 the	first	 time	you	are	whole	for	 the	first	 time	you	are	 really	holy	and	from
this	 moment	 real	 things	 start	 happening	 but	 nothing	 can	 be	 said	 about	 them
nothing	 has	 been	 written	 about	 them	 it	 is	 the	 world	 of	 the	 inexpressible
meditation	is	only	a	pointing	of	the	way	a	milestone,	an	arrow
showing	you,	go	on,	go	on
and	then	the	milestone	comes	with	a	zero	on	it	miles	have	disappeared,	arrows
have	disappeared	now	the	zero	has	come
that	zero	is	the	ultimate	search	of	all	sannyas	and	to	achieve	it	is	to	achieve	all
because	the	zero	is	synonymous	with	the	whole	meditation	is	a	transcendence	a
transcendence	of	three	things	the	body,	the	mind	and	the	heart	the	body	consists
of	actions	the	mind	of	thoughts,	the	heart	of	feelings	ordinarily	we	think	we	are
just	a	combination	of	these	three	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
we	are	not	--	we	are	the	fourth	these	three	are	there	surrounding	us	but	the	centre
is	 beyond	 all	 three	 and	 to	 find	 that	 centre	 of	 the	 cyclone	 is	 the	 whole	 art	 of
meditation	so	first	one	has	to	transcend	the	body	and	it	is	simple
by	just	watching	and	remembering	i	am	not	the	body
slowly	slowly
the	remembrance	becomes	an	undercurrent	then	you	don't	remember
it	is	there,	you	know	it
and	the	same	has	to	be	done	with	the	mind	i	am	not	my	thoughts
thoughts	are	like	birds	who	come	in	the	evening	for	an	overnight	stay	in	the	tree
and	in	the	morning	they	are	gone	thousands	of	thoughts
have	been	taking	shelter	in	your	mind	and	have	left
they	don't	belong	to	you,	they	come	and	go	you	abide,	they	don't	abide	they	are
changing,	 you	 are	 eternal	 the	 remembrance	 that	 i	 am	 not	my	 thoughts	 slowly
slowly	seeps	deep	into	you	and	becomes	a	realisation
and	then	nothing	has	to	be	done	the	body	goes	on	doing	its	work	the	mind	goes
on	doing	its	work	only	our	identification	is	no	more	there	we	attain	to	a	certain
detachment	 a	 deep	 aloofness,	 a	 certain	 coolness	 the	most	 difficult	 is	 the	 third
because	 feelings	are	very	close	emotions	are	very	close,	moods	are	very	close
but	if	one	succeeds	with	the	first	two	it	is	not	difficult	to	succeed	with	the	third
one	should	start	with	the	first,	the	body	then	with	the	mind,	then	with	the	heart
once	all	these	three	are	transcended	for	the	first	time	you	experience	who	you	are
and	that	experience	is	liberation	liberation	from	misery
liberation	from	death
liberation	from	everything	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
from	every	limitation
to	know	oneself	as	transcendental	is	to	know	oneself	as	divine	the	only	problem
in	front	of	man	is	the	ego	it	is	the	ancientmost	problem	there	is	no	other	problem
and	 the	 problem	 is	 soluble	 because	 it	 is	 our	 own	 invention,	 it	 does	 not	 really
exist	 ego	 is	 a	 put-together	 phenomenon	 we	 have	 manufactured	 it	 for	 certain
purposes	the	society	has	supported	it,	 the	society	needs	it	 the	simple	process	is
that	if	you	have	a	false	centre	it	can	be	controlled
if	you	have	a	real	centre	it	cannot	be	controlled	reality	cannot	be	enslaved	hence
the	society	has	invented	a	false	centre	and	before	the	child	becomes	aware	of	his
real	centre
he	 is	 handed	 over	 a	 false	 centre	 and	 the	 false	 centre	 is	 useful	 for	 the	 society
politicians,	priests,	pedagogues	they	will	all	be	using	it
the	man	who	lives	with	the	false	centre	never	becomes	aware
of	what	has	gone	wrong	with	him	he	always	feels	something	is	missing	he	is	not
what	he	should	be	there	is	a	constant	subtle	awareness	that	he	is	false,	pseudo,
that	 he	 is	wearing	 a	mask	 but	 because	 he	 has	 never	 seen	 his	 original	 face	 he
cannot	discard	the	mask	either	because	he	is	afraid
maybe	there	is	no	face	at	all	it	 is	better	to	have	a	false	face	than	to	be	faceless
who	knows	what	is	behind	the	mask?
behind	 the	mask	 is	 the	 real,	 original	 face	behind	 the	 ego	 is	 the	 real	 centre	but
unless	we	discard	the	false	the	real	cannot	be	found
discarding	 the	 false	 is	 the	only	way	 to	 find	 the	 real	meditation	 is	 a	process	of
elimination	go	on	eliminating	whatsoever	is	false	mercilessly	go	on	peeling
whatsoever	others	have	imposed	upon	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	soon	you	will	come	to	a	source	which	is	authentically	yours	and	the	moment
that	source	is	found	life	has	a	different	juice	to	it	a	different	perfume,	a	different
freedom	then	nothing	is	felt	to	be	missing	there	is	great	contentment,	fulfilment
one	has	come	to	flowering
in	the	state	of	egolessness	one	starts	hearing	the	celestial	music	the	music	of	the
stars
one	starts	hearing	the	message	of	the	whole	it	is	wordless
but	it	is	heard	and	understood	it	is
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
in	fact	it	is	soundless
because	one	hand	clapping
cannot	create	any	sound
but	still	 there	is	a	music	to	 that	silence	a	subtle	rhythm	in	that	silence	and	that
rhythm	 is	 the	 rhythm	of	 the	universe	once	you	have	 found	 it	you	are	no	more
separate	all	walls	disappear	and	become	bridges	 these	are	 the	 two	ways	to	 live
your	life	either	surrounded	by	walls	disconnected	from	the	whole	that	is	the	way
of	the	ego,	the	way	of	the	mind	and	the	other	style	of	life	is	making	all	the	walls
into	bridges	connected,	part	of	the	whole	that	is	the	way	of	meditation,	the	way
of	egolessness	 the	 first	person	 lives	 in	hell	 and	only	he	 is	 responsible,	nobody
else	and	the	second	person	lives	in	heaven	again	he	is	responsible,	nobody	else	it
is	our	choice
so	 don't	 ever	 blame	 stars,	 don't	 ever	 blame	 fate	 don't	 shirk	 your	 responsibility
don't	throw	it	on	anybody	else's	shoulders	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
this	is	one	of	the	fundamentals	of	sannyas	that	i	am	responsible
for	whatsoever	is	happening	to	me	only	i	am	responsible	and	nobody	else	once
this	responsibility	is	totally	accepted	life	goes	through	a	revolution	a	revolution
that	brings
thousands	 of	 blessings	 and	 benedictions	The	 Sound	 of	 One	Hand	 Clapping
Chapter	#11
Chapter	title:	None
11	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103115
ShortTitle:	CLAPP11
Audio:
No
Video:
No
man	lives	in	a	deep	anguish	for	the	simple	reason
that	he	has	not	the	courage	to	merge	with	the	whole	he	is	afraid
hence	he	creates	all	kinds	of	defenses	barriers,	walls
he	is	afraid	of	losing	his	identity	and	that	is	the	greatest	fear	in	the	world	and	just
the	 opposite	 is	 the	 case	 with	 courage	 courage	 means	 readiness	 to	 lose	 one's
identity	the	moment	you	lose	your	identity	all	anguish,	anxiety	disappears	then
the	whole	takes	over
then	you	are	just	an	organic	part	of	the	total	the	universal,	the	eternal	courage	is
needed	 and	 trust	 is	 needed	 fear	 cannot	 trust,	 fear	 always	 doubts,	 is	 suspicious
courage	can	trust,	courage	can	risk	courage	can	put	all	the	doubts	aside	and	the
moment	you	put	all	the	doubts	aside	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	are	ready	to	take	the	plunge	into	the	whole	silence	starts	showering	on	you
the	most	 beautiful	 experience	of	 life	 is	 silence	 falling	 like	 rainwater	 on	you	 it
cleanses	you	of	all	dust	and	dirt	it	is	the	only	true	baptism	silence	makes	you	a
shrine	it	creates	a	temple
in	the	innermost	core	of	your	being	without	silence
you	have	not	even	known	your	own	source	your	own	centre
the	noise	keeps	you	occupied,	the	world	is	noisy	and	the	mind
which	is	a	by-product	of	the	same	world	is	bound	to	be	noisy
if	one	wants	 to	know	silence	and	 the	 taste	of	 it	 then	one	has	 to	go	beyond	 the
world	and	all	its	by-products
then	one	has	to	search
for	 the	part	 in	oneself	which	comes	from	the	beyond	it	 is	 there,	 it	 is	your	very
soul	 a	 little	 bit	 of	 exploration	 is	 needed	 sannyas	 is	 exploring	 one's	 own
interiority	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 found	 silence	 you	 have	 found	 the	 true
temple	the	true	church,	the	true	synagogue	all	others	are	inventions	of	the	crafty
priests	and	it	is	only	at	the	innermost	core	of	your	being's	altar
that	godliness	can	be	experienced	you	discover	silence
and	godliness	comes	as	a	reward	on	the	surface	there	seems	to	be	no	connection
between	these	two	meanings	coming	with	joy,	and	the	outsider	the	foreigner,	the
stranger	 but	 there	 is	 a	 certain	 connection	 deep	 down	 the	 connection	 is	 that
people	are	living	in	misery
that	is	their	way	of	life
and	whenever	 they	 see	 somebody	 rejoicing	he	 is	 immediately	mistrusted	he	 is
immediately	 mistrusted	 because	 he	 does	 not	 belong	 to	 the	 crowd	 he	 is	 an
outsider,	he	is	a	stranger	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	crowd	lives	in	misery
and	only	a	few	people	up	to	now	have	been	able.
it	is	unfortunate,	very	sad	but	a	fact	and	it	cannot	be	denied	--	very	few	people	so
few	that	they	can	be	counted	on	fingers	have	lived	in	joy
of	course	they	were	all	thought	of	as	strangers	Jesus	is	crucified	because	of	that
strangeness	buddha	is	stoned
many	 attempts	 have	 been	made	 to	 kill	 him	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 people
cannot	trust	him	he	seems	to	be	not	part	of	them	and	the	same	has	been	true	for
others	socrates,	al	hillaj	mansoor,	sarmad	the	people	who	have	lived	rejoicingly
have	been	tortured	by	the	masses	killed	by	the	masses
hence	 the	meaning	between	those	 two	very	different	connotations	coming	with
joy	and	a	stranger	and	joy	is	everybody's	birthright	of	course	man	is	free	not	to
choose	it	that's	what	millions	of	people	have	decided	to	do	the	reason	is
they	don't	want	to	go	against	the	crowd	mind	the	crowd	mind	may	create
a	 thousand	 and	 one	 difficulties	 for	 them	 a	 sannyasin	 is	 committed	 to	 be	 a
stranger	he	is	committed	to	be	an	outsider	he	has	chosen	consciously,	i	am	going
to	live	in	joy	and	the	only	condition	that	is	needed	to	fulfil	it	is	silence
if	you	become	a	 little	more	silent	more	and	more	 joy	will	arise	out	of	you	 the
moment	 you	 are	 totally	 silent	 an	 infinite	 explosion	 of	 joy	 happens	 there	 is	 a
space	within	you	where	all	dualities	disappear	where	light	and	darkness	are	no
more	separate	but	one
where	life	and	death	are	no	more	separate	but	one
these	things	are	separate	in	the	mind,	in	the	head	the	head	lives	in	dualities	the
head	functions	like	a	prism	if	you	pass	a	ray	of	light	through	the	prism	it	divides
it	into	seven	colours	that's	how	the	rainbow	is	created	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	reverse	of	one	colour
just	pure	white
but	the	prism	dissects	it,	cuts	it	into	seven	parts	the	same	is	the	way	of	the	mind
it	cuts	everything	into	love	and	hate	misery	and	bliss,	life	and	death,	summer	and
winter	and	so	on	and	so	forth
but	when	you	go	beyond	the	mind...
and	that's	the	place	where	silence	is	the	moment	you	leave	the	mind	behind	those
dualities	start	disappearing	the	rainbow	becomes	one	colour	just	pure	white
white	is	the	colour	of	silence	oneness	is	the	nature	of	silence	and	once	you	have
heard	 your	 own	 silence	 then	 there	 is	 no	 music	 compared	 to	 it	 no	 dance,	 no
celebration
which	can	even	come	close	to	it	everything	seems	to	be	just	ordinary	compared
to	the	inner	silence
and	the	man	who	attains	to	that	silence	becomes	the	beloved	of	the	universe	that
is	the	meaning	of	supriya	supriya	means	the	beloved
the	only	proof	for	god	or	godliness	to	be	more	exact	is	the	experience	of	silence
a	great	philosopher,	maulingaputta	came	to	gautam	the	buddha
and	he	asked,	can	you	prove	that	god	exists?
buddha	said,	if	you	really	want	the	proof	are	you	ready	to	fulfil	the	conditions?
maulingaputta	said
i	am	ready	to	fulfil	any	conditions	but	i	want	the	proof
buddha	 said,	 then	 do	 one	 thing:	 for	 two	 years	 just	 sit	 silently	 by	my	 side	 no
question
no	argumentation
just	be	silent
fall	 deeper	 and	 deeper	 into	 silence	 and	 when	 two	 years	 have	 passed	 i	 will
enquire
two	years	passed	and	exactly	the	same	day	buddha	asked	maulingaputta	do	you
need	any	proof	now?
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	maulingaputta	laughed,	he	said	you	have	given	the	proof,	i	have	experienced
it	silence	is	enough	proof	and	there	is	no	proof	now	i	know	why	you	have	made
this	condition	these	two	years	of	falling	and	falling	into	the	abysmal	silence
it	 is	 no	 more	 a	 philosophical	 question	 now	 it	 has	 become	 an	 existential
experience	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 not	 to	 bother	 themselves	 with	 philosophical
questions	 with	 theological	 arguments	 my	 approach	 is	 existential	 be	 still	 and
know
because	 there	 is	no	other	way	 to	know	one	of	 the	most	 significant	 things	o	be
remembered	is
never	cultivate	silence
anything	cultivated	is	always	false	and	we	are	trained	to	cultivate	everything	we
are	told	to	love
as	if	one	can	manage	to	love	as	if	it	is	one's	question	of	willing	as	if	it	is	nothing
but	 putting	 more	 effort	 into	 it	 as	 if	 it	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 doing	 we	 are	 told	 to	 be
compassionate	to	be	of	service	to	others	and	all	kinds	of	nonsense
and	because	from	the	very	beginning	we	are	told	we	start	trying
the	real	never	happens	that	way	but	we	start	creating	the	unreal	one	can	pretend
to	be	 loving	one	can	pretend	 to	be	compassionate	and	one	can	pretend	so	 long
that	 one	 can	 forget	 completely	 that	 is	 it	 is	 a	 pretension	 and	 that	 is	 the	 most
degrading	experience	in	human	life
my	approach	is
never	cultivate	anything
otherwise	 you	 will	 be	 moving	 in	 the	 dimension	 of	 the	 false	 discover	 your
spontaneity
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	 in	 that	very	discovery	you	will	 discover	many	 things	which	you	were	not
even	dreaming	of	because	all	that	is	really	significant	is	part	of	your	spontaneity
the	spontaneous	person	is	loving	not	that	he	is	trying	to	love;	he	is	simply	loving
the	spontaneous	person	is	compassionate	is	kind,	is	just
these	are	not	qualities	 that	he	has	cultivated	not	qualities	 that	he	has	cultivated
not	 qualities	 that	 he	 has	 disciplined	 himself	 to	 they	 are	 just	 flowers	 of	 his
spontaneity	 roses	 on	 the	 bush	 of	 spontaneity	 and	 the	 way	 to	 discover	 your
spontaneous	nature	is	silence
create	a	distance
between	the	noise	of	your	head	and	your	being	move	as	far	away	from	the	head
as	possible	the	farther	you	are	away	from	the	head	the	better	because	from	that
extreme
you	will	not	be	able	to	hear	the	noise	of	the	head	slowly	slowly	it	will	fade	away
in	 the	 distance	 the	 moment	 it	 takes	 away	 into	 the	 far	 distance	 you	 have
discovered	something	there	is	no	interference
the	mind	is	no	more	poking	its	nose	in	and	suddenly	you	become	aware	of	your
own	intrinsic	nature	and	with	that	is	the	beginning	of	miracles	but	with	me	the
immediate	 is	 the	ultimate	 the	 immediate	and	 the	ultimate	are	not	 two	different
things	with	me	the	ultimate	is	not	somewhere	far	away	the	ultimate	is	very	close
by	 in	 the	very	 immediate	 it	 is	present	 in	 the	very	 immediate	 it	 is	pulsating	 the
immediate	 is	 the	 heartbeat	 of	 the	 ultimate	 so	 when	 i	 say	 that	 silence	 is	 the
ultimate	goal	avoid	misunderstanding	me
i	am	saying
that	silence	is	the	immediate	way	of	living	live	silently
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
people	are	living	with	such	a	fuss	with	so	much	noise
unnecessary
but	they	have	become	accustomed	to	it	addicted	to	it
unless	 they	 make	 much	 fuss	 and	 much	 noise	 they	 start	 feeling	 as	 if	 life	 is
slipping	out	of	their	hands	the	more	noise	they	make
the	more	they	seem	to	be	alive	they	are	not	alive
they	are	simply	insane
because	life	happens	only	in	deep	silence	but	this	whole	earth	is	a	big	madhouse
politicians	are	making	so	much	noise;	they	live	on	it	the	more	you	kick	the	dust
the	more	you	create	clouds	around	you	the	bigger	you	are
the	 more	 mischievous	 you	 are	 the	 more	 is	 the	 possibility	 that	 you	 will	 be
remembered	in	history	alexander,	tamerlaine,	genghis	khan,	nadir	shah	napoleon,
adolf	hitler,	mussolini,	stalin	these	are	the	people
who	fill	the	whole	history	of	humanity	the	buddhas	are	not	even	to	be	found	in
the	footnotes
because	 they	never	made	any	noise	 they	 lived	silently,	 lived	 joyously	and	died
silently	and	died	joyously	but	they	are	the	real	people	the	very	salt	of	the	earth
remember:	if	one	wants	to	b	really	alive	and	ecstatically	alive
then	silence	is	the	way
the	way	and	the	goal	both
the	means	and	the	end	both	the	immediate	and	the	ultimate	both	silence	is	not	a
word
it	is	an	experience
it	is	not	a	doctrine,	a	dogma	but	a	taste	on	the	tongue
something	to	be	eaten,	to	be	drunk,	to	be	digested	something	that	becomes	part
of	your	blood,	bones	and	very	marrow	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	people	go	on	 living	with	words	 the	word	becomes	more	 important	 to	 them
than	the	experience
the	word	god	seems	to	be	more	important	than	any	experience	of	god	the	word
love	 seems	 to	 be	more	 important	 than	 any	 experience	 of	 love	my	 sannyasins
have	 to	 be	 very	 aware	 of	 it	 don't	 be	 trapped	 into	 words	 because	millions	 are
trapped	 in	 words	 always	 go	 beyond	 the	 word	 into	 the	 experience	 unless	 you
reach	 the	 experience	 you	 have	 not	 lived	 your	 life	 the	 way	 it	 should	 be	 lived
intensely,	passionately,	totally	the	worldly	people
are	the	most	impotent	people	in	the	world	they	know	all	big	words	and	the	whole
jargon	they	are	great	bullshitters	they	can	go	on	and	on	talking	about	things	they
have	not	experienced	at	all	beware	of	that	trap,	that	trap	is	everywhere	there	are
christian	traps,	hindu	traps	mohammedan	traps
traps	are	available	in	all	sizes	and	shapes	and	unless	one	is	very	watchful	one	is
going	to	be	trapped	somewhere	but	a	simple	awareness	that	the	word	is	not	the
reality	the	word	love	is	not	love
the	word	god	is	not	god
and	the	word	fire	 is	not	 fire	only	 this	much	awareness	 is	enough	and	 then	you
will	 start	 searching	 for	 the	 experience	 and	 the	 experience	 is	 liberating	 the
experience	is	enriching	and	silence	is	the	greatest	treasure	if	you	experience...
it	is	the	very	kingdom	of	god	the	noisy	mind	is	never	in	a	state	of	balance	it	is
always	swaying	like	a	pendulum	from	left	to	right,	from	right	to	left	it	is	never	in
any	state
it	 is	always	moving	somewhere	and	 there	 is	one	 thing	more	 to	be	remembered
about	the	pendulum
when	 it	 is	 going	 to	 the	 far	 right	 it	 is	 gaining	momentum	 to	go	 to	 the	 left	 it	 is
getting	ready	to	go	to	the	left	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	packing	its	suitcases	on	the	surface	it	looks	going	to	the	right	deep	down	its
whole	psychology	 is	going	 towards	 the	opposite	 it	 is	always	 in	a	contradiction
mind	 is	 a	 contradiction,	 a	 continuous	 fight	 there	 is	 not	 even	 a	 single	moment
when	the	mind	can	be	said	to	be	in	a	state	of	balance
it	is	not	possible	for	the	mind	because	to	be	in	balance
means	not	to	be	in	the	mind	mind	means	imbalance	if	the	pendulum	stops	in	the
middle	then	the	clock	stops	immediately	the	clock	can	continue
only	 if	 the	pendulum	goes	on	moving	 silence	 is	 the	 stopping	of	 the	pendulum
and	the	moment	your	mind	stops	suddenly	there	is	great	balance	and	that	balance
is	the	truth	of	life	and	to	live	life	out	of	that	balance	is	beauty,	grace
it	 is	 easily	 possible,	 very	 easily	 possible	 but	 the	 saints	 have	 been	 telling	 the
whole	world	that	it	is	very	difficult	they	have	been	deceiving	you	for	the	simple
reason	that	if	it	is	very	simple
then	their	saintliness	will	not	be	of	much	value	 if	 it	 is	available	 to	all	ordinary
human	beings	then	what	is	there	special	in	being	a	saint?
so	they	try	to	brag	about	it	they	go	on	putting	it	higher	and	higher	beyond	your
reach
somewhere	there	on	the	everest	so	that	you	cannot	reach	there	so	that	they	can
claim	only,	we	have	reached	the	chosen	few	of	god
in	fact	the	whole	existence	is	divine	there	is	nobody	who	is	chosen	all	are	chosen
or	nobody	is	chosen	and	to	attain	to	silence	and	equilibrium	is	a	very	simple	and
natural	phenomenon	very	ordinary
it	has	to	be	brought	to	the	notice	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
of	every	human	being
that	for	centuries	you	have	been	deceived	and	fooled
few	egoists	have	been	on	a	great	ego	trip	holier-than-thou
the	messengers	of	god,	the	prophets	of	god	the	incarnations	of	god,	these	are	the
people	who	have	reduced	humanity	into	utter	slavery	my	effort	here	is	to	make
you	rejoice	in	your	ordinariness
to	make	you	rejoice	the	way	you	are	i	am	not	interested
in	giving	you	any	perfectionist	goals	my	whole	effort	is	to	make	you	aware	that
whatsoever	is	needed	is	within	your	grasp	that	whatsoever	is	needed
in	a	certain	way	existence	has	already	provided	for	you
you	just	have	to	look	within,	search	within	find	out	a	little,	explore	a	little
and	you	will	find	all	that	you	had	always	wanted	and	you	were	feeling	miserable
because	you	were	not	getting	 it	you	were	 looking	 in	wrong	directions	and	you
are	being	led	by	wrong	people	egoists	have	dominated	the	spiritual	scene	for	so
long
that	it	is	time	we	should	get	rid	of	all	kinds	of	egoists	mahatmas,	saints
and	all	kinds	of	those	spiritual	buffoons	we	should	be	finished	with	them	and	we
should	 declare	 the	 ordinary	 human	 being	 as	 the	 ultimate	 peak	 of	 divine
expression	start
moment-to-moment
living	silently
and	as	you	get	attuned	with	silence...
and	it	 is	as	simple	as	learning	to	ride	a	bicycle	as	difficult	and	as	simple	when
you	 try	 to	 ride	on	a	bicycle	 for	 the	first	 time	 it	 is	 really	very	difficult	 the	very
idea	of	sitting	on	two	wheels	makes	one	tremble	inside
one	knows	that	one	is	bound	to	fall	but	just	a	few	efforts
maybe	once	or	twice	you	will	fall	--	so	what?
one	can	again	ride	on	the	bicycle	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
there	is	no	problem	in	it
once	you	have	 learned	 the	knack	surprised:	 it	was	so	simple,	 it	 is	 just	a	knack
those	who	know,	know	it	 is	very	simple	 those	who	don't	know,	 they	think	it	 is
very	difficult	and	the	difference	can	be	bridged	very	easily	just	by	a	few	efforts
sannyas	means	making	a	 few	efforts	 for	something	which	 is	absolutely	needed
without	which	we	are	not	truly	living	without	which	we	are	not	joyous	without
which	we	are	not	really	rich	without	which	the	whole	opportunity	is	going	down
the	drain
and	just	a	few	efforts
and	i	have	been	teaching	so	many	people	to	ride	the	bicycle
yes,	once	in	a	while	they	fall	but	that	fall	is	not	bad;	it	teaches	you	the	knack	it	is
good,	it	is	helpful
the	only	stupid	people	in	the	world	are	those	who	never	try
who	remain	closed	and	afraid,	shrunken	and	the	greatest	fear
that	the	so-called	spiritual	leaders	of	humanity	have	created	is	that	of	committing
a	mistake	and	anybody	who	wants	to	learn	has	to	commit	mistakes
so	i	tell	my	people
commit	 as	many	mistakes	 as	 you	 can	 commit	 new	mistakes	 every	 day	 invent
new	ones,	find	out	new	ones	don't	repeat	the	old
and	then	learning	begins
and	there	is	no	end	to	learning	a	child	forever
and	that	is	the	true	way	of	being	a	sage	a	child	forever
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#12
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Chapter	title:	None
12	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103125
ShortTitle:	CLAPP12
Audio:
No
Video:
No
truth	cannot	be	achieved	by	human	efforts	because	all	human	efforts	are	bound
to	originate	in	the	mind
and	mind	is	the	barrier
between	truth	and	consciousness	the	mind	has	to	be	put	aside	that's	what	man	is
capable	of	doing	not	using	the	mind,	putting	the	mind	aside	by-passing	the	mind,
transcending	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 moment	 the	 mind	 is	 not	 functioning
consciousness	immediately	becomes	connected	with	the	truth
the	barrier	is	no	more	there	hence	the	bridge	happens
and	that	is	the	greatest	blessing	in	existence	when	truth	showers	on	you
only	 with	 the	 experience	 of	 truth	 life	 becomes	 meaningful,	 significant	 a
celebration
a	man	without	truth	is	a	beggar	a	man	without	truth	is	not	yet	really	alive	he	is
simply	living	in	a	kind	of	dream	he	is	not	awakened
not	awakened
to	the	tremendous	beauty	of	existence	to	the	immense	ecstasy	of	life	not	aware
of	all	the	gifts	that	the	whole	has	given	to	you	the	search	for	truth	is	really	the
search	for	meaning,	the	search	for	who	am	i?
and	the	single	question,	who	am	i?	is	enough	if	you	can	ask	it	with	totality	it	will
penetrate	to	the	very	core	of	the	mystery	of	all	that	is	the	moment	your	question
is	answered	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
not	by	somebody	else,	not	by	any	scripture	but	by	your	own	being
when	it	becomes	your	experience,	existential	 then	life	is	the	life	of	a	king	then
the	 whole	 kingdom	 of	 god	 is	 yours	 that	 simple	 word	 truth	 makes	 really	 a
difference	before	it	one	is	a	beggar
after	it	one	is	the	greatest	king	before	it	one	is	constantly	asking	for	more	after	it
there	is	only	thankfulness,	gratitude	there	is	no	god	except	the	truth	of	existence
god	is	not	a	person
but	 the	 experience	 of	 the	 ultimate	meaning	 of	 life	 hence	 all	 worship	 is	 futile
enquiry	 is	 valid,	 worship	 is	 futile	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 be	 enquirers	 not
worshippers
when	 you	worship	 you	worship	 an	 object	 and	 those	 objects	 are	 all	man-made
those	temples,	synagogues,	churches	are	all	man-made
you	can	worship	philosophies,	theologies	they	are	also	inventions	of	the	human
mind	the	enquirer	has	to	travel	a	totally	different	path	his	journey	is	towards	his
innermost	centre	he	turns	within
because	that	is	the	only	possible	way	to	know	what	it	is	really	that	is	hidden	in
the	 secretmost	 shrine	 of	 my	 being	 what	 is	 this	 consciousness?	 what	 is	 this
awareness?
what	is	this	love?	where	is	the	source	of	it	all?
and	 the	 source	 is	 not	 without,	 the	 source	 is	 within	 hence	 those	 who	 go	 on
looking	on	the	outside	will	never	find
turn	in	and	the	very	moment	of	turning	and	you	are	entering
into	 a	 totally	 different	 dimension	 the	 dimension	 of	 godliness,	 of	 truth,	 of
freedom	of	all	that	is	valuable
truth	is	god
the	word	god	can	be	dropped	but	the	word	truth	cannot	be	dropped	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	truth	is	the	search	of	all	god	is	not	the	search	of	all	almost	half	the	humanity
are	no	more	believers	soviet	russia,	china	and	other	countries	have	dropped	the
very	 idea	of	god	and	 the	people	who	are	believers	are	only	so-called	believers
they	don't	believe	either,	they	are	pretenders	but	nobody	can	drop	the	search	for
truth	 it	 is	 intrinsic	 in	 our	 very	being	 truth	 comes	 almost	 like	 a	 spring	 into	 the
interior	world	of	 your	being	 suddenly	 thousands	of	 flowers	 start	 blooming	 the
whole	climate	changes
it	becomes	colourful,	fragrant,	birds	start	singing	for	the	first	time
you	see	yourself	totally	transform~d	no	more	a	dead	weight
no	more	just	dragging	your	life	somehow	for	the	first	time	dance	enters	in	for	the
first	 time	 you	 feel	 a	 tremendous	 rejoicing	 uncontainable,	 overwhelming,
overflowing	the	search	for	truth	is	really	the	most	basic	and	fundamental	search
of	 humanity	 because	without	 it	we	 are	 deserts	 only	 if	 truth	 happens	 to	 us	 the
desert	 can	 become	 green	 only	 if	 truth	 happens	 to	 us	 we	 can	 know	 the
inexhaustible	treasures	which	are	hidden	within	us	and	truth	is	not	very	difficult
to	find	either	the	only	question	is	a	right	approach	if	you	think	about	truth
you	have	taken	a	wrong	approach	thinking	is	the	wrong	approach	towards	truth
that	is	the	way	of	philosophy	meditation	is	the	right	approach	and	meditation	is
just	the	opposite	of	thinking	meditation	is	anti-philosophy	it	simply	means
dropping	the	whole	structure	of	thinking	dropping	the	whole	process	of	thinking
and	just	being	silent,	utterly	silent	alert	but	absolutely	silent	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
as	 if	 the	 whole	 world	 has	 stopped	 there	 is	 an	 ancient	 sufi	 story	 a	 crazy	 king
became	 interested	 in	 the	 idea	 that	 if	 the	 whole	 world	 at	 a	 certain	 time	 starts
shouting	and	screaming	and	doing	primal	it	will	be	really	a	great	experience	the
whole	world,	exactly	at	twelve	o'clock	in	the	middle	of	the	day
for	 five	minutes	goes	berserk	and	 they	put	 their	whole	energy	 into	 it	 and	 they
cathart	 --	 the	whole	 earth	 and	 of	 course,	 he	was	 a	 great	 king	 and	 he	 had	 the
power
everybody	thought	the	whole	idea	was	simply	mad	but	they	had	to	follow
a	day	was	 fixed,	 the	whole	world	was	 informed	at	 twelve	o'clock	on	a	certain
monday	for	five	minutes	put	your	total	energy	into	it	don't	withhold,	let	go
shout,	 scream,	 do	 jibberish	 whatsoever	 happens,	 allow	 it	 and	 of	 course	 those
who	will	not	do	 it	will	be	 sentenced	 to	death	 the	whole	world	awaited	 for	 the
moment	and	really	something	miraculous	happened	exactly	at	twelve	o'clock
the	whole	world	fell	into	deep	silence	nobody	had	ever	experienced	such	silence
the	reason	was	 that	everybody	 thought	when	 the	whole	world	will	be	shouting
who	will	be	able	to	find	me?
and	why	should	i	miss	the	opportunity	to	listen	to	the	whole	world	going	crazy?
so	i	will	just	wait	and	enjoy	the	whole	thing	why	should	i	participate?
if	i	participate	i	may	not	be	able	to	enjoy	it	i	may	not	be	able	to	experience	what
is	happening	and	this	was	the	logic	of	everybody	for	five	minutes
there	 was	 such	 a	 thick,	 dense	 silence	 that	 it	 is	 said,	 the	 crazy	 king	 became
enlightened	he	was	not	waiting	for	it,	it	was	such	a	shock	but	the	shock	stopped
his	mind	the	story	does	not	say
what	happened	to	many	other	people	i	think	many	others
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
must	have	become	enlightened	too	because	with	such	silence
one	starts	experiencing	the	truth	but	there	is	no	need
for	 the	whole	world	 to	become	silent	 if	only	 the	world	of	your	mind	becomes
silent	that's	enough
so	any	day,	 twelve	o'clock,	 for	 five	minutes	 just	 stop	 the	world	within	and	see
what	 happens	 once	 you	 start	 having	 a	 few	 glimpses	 of	 silence	 truth	 starts
penetrating
the	deeper	the	silence
the	 deeper	 the	 thrust	 of	 the	 truth	 and	when	 absolute	 silence	 happens	 absolute
truth	is	yours
and	that	is	the	moment	when	the	spring	bursts	forth	truth	brings	many	things	in
its	wake	it	brings	many	gifts	--	virtue	is	one	of	those	gifts	the	truth	of	one's	own
being	experienced	changes	your	whole	life	pattern	absolutely,	irrevocably
for	example,	if	you	were	jealous	before	you	cannot	be	jealous	afterwards	if	you
were	egoistic	before	you	cannot	be	egoistic	afterwards	if	you	were	dishonest
you	cannot	be	dishonest	afterwards	if	you	were	unkind
you	cannot	be	unkind	afterwards	because	the	experience	of	truth	is	such	that	one
cannot	in	any	possible	way	go	against	it	it	is	just	like	when	there	is	light	in	the
room	you	don't	try	to	go	through	the	wall	you	go	through	the	door
yes,	when	there	is	darkness	you	grope	and	sometimes	you	try	to	get	through	the
wall	you	stumble	--	that	is	because	there	is	darkness	bring	the	light	in	and	then
there	 is	no	problem	at	 all	you	know	where	 the	door	 is	you	don't	 even	have	 to
think	about	the	door	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	simply	know	it,	where	it	is	and	virtue	is	a	door	and	sin	is	a	wall	but	i	don't
say	to	my	people	to	cultivate	virtue	and	renounce	sin	that	is	not	possible
that	is	saying	to	a	man	who	lives	in	a	dark	cave	to	renounce	stumbling	and	vow
to	god	that	you	will	always	enter	from	the	door	that	is	asking	too	much
in	darkness	you	have	to	be	more	lenient	but	bring	the	light	in
and	then	there	is	no	need	to	say	anything	so	i	don't	give	to	you	any	discipline	i
only	want	one	thing	to	happen	to	you	that	is	the	experience	of	your	own	being	i
call	it	the	truth
become	 silent,	 know	 your	 own	 truth	 and	 that	 will	 be	 decisive,	 that	 will	 be
liberating	we	are	born	with	the	kingdom	of	truth	we	bring	from	the	beyond	the
whole	kingdom	but	of	course	in	a	potential	form,	just	as	a	seed	hence	it	cannot
be	taken	for	granted	one	has	to	help	the	seed	to	fall	in	the	soil	one	has	to	water
one	has	to	do	a	thousand	and	one	things	so	that	the	seed	can	relax,	can	dissolve
and	the	hidden	secret	can	become	an	actuality	truth	is	our	potential	but	it	has	to
be	made	actual	it	is	a	possibility	hence	it	is	not	beyond	our	grasp	but	one	has	to
look	 for	 it	 a	 little	bit	 dig	 for	 it	 a	 little	bit	 --	 it	 is	 always	 found	whosoever	has
looked	for	it	has	found	it	without	any	exception
but	that	little	effort	is	very	essential	looking	for	it
meditation	is	nothing	but	creating	a	right	situation	right	perspective,	a	clarity	of
the	eyes	so	that	you	can	look	within	yourself	where	the	seed	is	hidden
silence	gives	you	the	opportunity	to	become	unoccupied	with	the	world	and	the
moment
you	 are	 no	more	 occupied	with	 the	world	 your	whole	 attention	 starts	moving
inwards	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
your	whole	awareness
starts	converging	towards	your	centre	and	it	is	at	that	centre
that	 the	 ultimate	 truth	 is	 experienced	 the	 ultimate	music	 is	 heard	 the	 ultimate
ecstasy	 is	 felt	man	can	either	be	 rich	 in	possessions	he	can	conquer	 the	whole
world	he	can	accumulate	all	the	wealth	of	the	world	but	that	is	not	really	going
to	change	his	 inner	poverty	 --	on	 the	contrary	he	will	 feel	himself	poorer	 than
before	in	contrast	to	all	that	he	has	accumulated	he	will	be	able	to	see	that	deep
inside	the	wound	is	still	there,	far	more	clear	i	am	not	against	the	things	of	the
world	 i	 am	 not	 against	 the	 riches	 of	 the	 world	 but	 one	 thing	 has	 to	 be
remembered	that	there	are	greater	riches	than	that	and	a	greater	kingdom
is	 waiting	 inside	 you	 to	 be	 conquered	 so	 don't	 waste	 all	 your	 energy	 in	 the
outside	world	save	the	major	portion	of	your	energy	and	life	for	inner	enquiry
then	you	become	a	king	of	religion	what	jesus	calls	the	kingdom	of	god	and	it	is
everybody's	birthright	we	just	have	to	claim	it
truth	is	not	a	philosophical	concept	it	 is	the	experience	of	your	eternal	life	it	 is
the	experience	of	the	consciousness	you	are	built	of
and	that	consciousness	is	not	confined	between	birth	and	death
it	was	there	before	birth
and	it	will	be	there	after	death	thousands	of	births	and	deaths	have	happened	on
the	way
but	 your	 pilgrimage	 continues	 the	 pilgrimage	 is	 endless,	 beginningless	 the
moment	 one	 experiences	 one's	 deathlessness	 then	only	 one	knows	what	 life	 is
because	life	basically	is	deathlessness	once	death
is	 found	 to	 be	 irrelevant	 to	 your	 inner	 being	 then	 there	 is	 no	 fear,	 no	 anxiety
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	that	absence	of	fear	and	anxiety	creates	the	opportunity	for	bliss	to	descend
in	 you	 the	 fearful	 person	 cannot	 be	 blissful	 the	 fear	 is	 such	 a	 disturbance	 and
anxiety	creates	so	much	stress	and	tension	that	it	is	impossible	for	bliss	to	enter
in	you	bliss	can	enter	only
when	your	inner	being	is	absolutely	empty	of	fear	and	anxiety,	tension	and	stress
and	 as	 far	 as	 i	 have	 observed	working	with	 thousands	 of	 people	 these	 are	 the
barriers
and	 they	 are	 all	 related	 to	 death	 basically	 all	 fear	 is	 fear	 of	 death	 directly,
indirectly,	 but	 if	 you	 go	 on	 searching	 you	 will	 find	 it	 is	 always	 death	 that	 is
creating	fear,	anxiety,	stress,	 tension	 to	know	one's	being	as	eternal	 is	 to	know
the	 truth	 and	 that	 very	 truth	 becomes	 a	 blessing	 then	 life	 is	 lived	 on	 a	 totally
different	 plane	 with	 more	 playfulness,	 with	 more	 sense	 of	 humor	 then	 life
becomes	simply	a	relaxed	phenomenon	utterly	relaxed
just	as	flowers	are	relaxed	and	the	birds	are	relaxed
and	the	rivers	are	relaxed	and	the	mountains	are	relaxed	man	can	have	far	more
and	 far	deeper	 relaxation	 than	anybody	else	 in	 the	whole	of	 existence	because
man	certainly	is
the	pinnacle	of	consciousness	it	is	sad	to	look	at	humanity	they	could	have	been
the	 most	 blessed	 beings	 but	 they	 seem	 to	 be	 the	 most	 miserable	 truth	 is	 the
experience
of	a	meditative	consciousness	one	cannot	think	about	it
one	cannot	argue	about	it
one	 cannot	 be	 scientific	 about	 it	 one	 can	 only	 be	 meditative	 about	 it	 and
meditation	means	a	simple	 thing	a	state	of	no-mind,	a	state	of	utter	silence	the
Sound
of	one	hand
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
Clapping
so	 silent,	 so	 absolutely	 silent	 that	 there	 is	 no	 duality	 left,	 all	 is	 one	 all	 has
become	one,	the	dual	has	come	together	the	day	and	night	are	together	life	and
death	are	 together	 love	and	hate	 are	 together	 that	 communion	of	 the	opposites
that	meeting	of	the	polarities	that	mingling	and	merging	of	all	contradictions	the
moment	all	contradictions	are	complementaries	you	have	come	home
that	is	the	state	of	meditation	and	in	that	state
all	 that	 is	our	deepest	 longing	of	 the	heart	 is	fulfilled	--	so	 totally	fulfilled	 that
not	even	a	trace	of	desire	remains	in	one	the	old	religions	say	become	desireless
then	you	can	attain	to	god	now	that	is	absurd	to	say	to	people	become	desireless,
then	you	 can	 attain	 to	 god	 so	 apparently	 stupid,	 ridiculous	because	 the	people
who	want	to	attain	to	god	are	desirous	people	--	it	is	a	desire	to	attain	to	god	in
fact	the	greatest	desire	and	the	condition	is
be	desireless	so	that	you	can	attain	to	god	now	one	who	is	desireless
why	he	should	be	interested	in	god	at	all?
i	am	not
even	if	god	knocks	on	my	door	i	am	not	going	to	see	him
and	jesus	says	knock	and	the	doors	shall	be	opened	i	cannot	say	even	that	to	god
knock	and	i	shall	open	my	doors	why	should	i	knock,	open	my	doors	it	is	none
of	your	business	 to	knock	on	my	doors	 i	 don't	 knock	on	your	doors	you	don't
knock	on	my	doors	 --	 it	 is	an	agreement	 the	man	who	 is	 really	desireless	why
should	he	bother	about	god?
and	 if	 he	 is	 desiring	 god	 then	 how	 can	 he	 fulfil	 the	 basic	 condition	 of	 being
desireless?
so	i	don't	say	that
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
my	 approach	 is	 diametrically	 opposite	 i	 say	 be	 meditative,	 enjoy	 being	 silent
rejoice	 in	 being	 silent	 and	 in	 that	 very	 silence	 bliss	 will	 happen,	 truth	 will
happen	freedom	will	happen
and	once	bliss,	truth	and	freedom	and	love	have	happened
there	 will	 be	 nothing	 left	 to	 desire	 meditation	 brings	 naturally	 the	 state	 of
desirelessness
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#13
Chapter	title:	None
13	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103135
ShortTitle:	CLAPP13
Audio:
No
Video:
No
love	and	life	are	synonymous	in	language	they	may	have	different	meanings	but
in	existence
they	 are	 precisely	 the	 same	phenomenon	no	difference,	 no	gap	 exists	 between
the	 two	 the	 really	 alive	 person	 is	 pure	 love	 and	 if	 love	 is	missing	 then	 life	 is
nothing	but	a	vegetation	one	can	go	on	vegetating
without	love	life	has	not	happened	at	all	one	was	born,	one	existed,	one	died	but
life	never	happened
life	happens	only	 the	moment	 love	 starts	 flowing	and	 the	greater	 the	 love,	 the
deeper	life	becomes	a	sannyasin	has	to	remember	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
not	to	put	any	limitations	on	his	love	love	should	not	become	object-focussed	the
moment	you	become	object-focussed	you	are	getting	trapped
for	 example,	 if	 you	 love	 one	 person	 that	 means	 that	 the	 remaining	 whole
existence	has	been	rejected
you	have	excluded	it	out	of	your	love	affair	your	love	has	become	very	narrow
and	a	narrow	 love	becomes	an	 imprisonment	 love	 should	never	become	 like	a
tunnel	it	should	remain	open	from	all	sides	one	should	love	as	many	people	as
many	aspects	of	life
as	many	dimensions	as	possible	one	should	go	on	exploring	when	love	excludes
nothing	 then	 it	 reaches	 to	 its	 ultimate	 peak	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 one
experiences	 life	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 life	 becomes	 not	 just	 an	 ordinary
existence	it	takes	a	new	flavour,	it	becomes	godliness	love	is	not	a	duty
the	moment	you	make	a	duty	out	of	it	you	have	destroyed	it
if	 there	is	a	should	in	it,	 it	 is	a	corpse	you	can	carry	it,	you	can	decorate	it	but
there	 is	 no	 heartbeat	 in	 it	 and	 that's	 how	 humanity	 has	 been	 conditioned	 for
thousands	of	years
love	has	been	killed	in	such	a	subtle	way	not	directly	but	very	indirectly	and	the
methodology	used	to	kill,	to	murder	love	is	make	love	a	duty
love	your	mother,	it	is	your	duty	love	your	father,	it	is	your	duty	love	your	wife,
it	is	your	duty	love	your	children,	it	is	your	duty	even	love	your	neighbours,	it	is
your	duty	love	your	enemies
love	is	a	spontaneous	flowering	of	being	it	cannot	be	reduced	to	a	commandment
one	cannot	be	ordered	to	love	because	then	whatsoever	you	do	is	only	pretension
then	you	are	going	through	empty	gestures	remember	it	--	that	i	don't	teach	you
any	duty	at	all	duty	is	a	four-letter-dirty-word	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
love	for	no	reason	at	all
love	for	the	sheer	joy	of	loving	love	because	only	by	loving	will	you	be	able	to
know	what	it	is	all	about	this	whole	existence	this	life	this	miraculous	universe
that	surrounds	you	love	is	the	bridge	between	you	and	the	whole	hence	it	has	to
be	just	a	song	of	the	heart	just	as	in	the	morning	the	sun	is	rising	and	birds	start
singing,	for	no	reason	at	all	the	sheer	joy	of	the	sun	rising	the	night	is	finished
the	sheer	joy	of	seeing	the	sky	again	and	the	vastness	and	the	freedom	of	it	the
sheer	 joy	 of	 seeing	 flowers	 again	 opening	 up	 and	 all	 the	 colours	 and	 all	 the
fragrance	 and	 the	 bird	 cannot	 contain	 himself	 he	 starts	 overflowing,	 he	 starts
singing	 that	 song	 is	 exactly	 what	 happens	 when	 you	 drop	 the	 idea	 of	 duty
responsibility,	virtue,	morality	and	you	start	enjoying	whatsoever	is	available	in
that	 very	 enjoyment	 something	 is	 triggered	 in	 you	 the	 heart	 starts	 dancing,
singing	and	those	moments	of	heartfelt	 joy	are	 the	real	moments,	 the	only	real
moments	and	once	you	have	tasted	them	there	is	no	need	to	have	any	other	kind
of	moments	then	twenty-four	hours	a	day	the	song	can	continue	underneath,	just
below	your	 consciousness	 it	 can	become	a	 constant	 presence	deep	 inside	your
being
to	me
when	love	becomes	your	constant	innermost	core	god	has	happened
that's	the	only	way	god	happens	there	is	no	other	way
love	has	a	way	of	its	own
it	 becomes	 victorious	 but	 in	 a	 very	 strange	 way	 without	 conquering,	 without
fighting	in	fact	without	even	desiring	to	be	victorious	victory	comes	as	a	gift
as	 a	 reward	 from	 the	 beyond	 love	 is	 ready	 to	 be	 defeated	 love	 enjoys	 to	 be
defeated	love	is	ready	to	surrender	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
love	 is	 never	 willing	 to	 fight	 but	 this	 is	 one	 of	 the	 miracles	 of	 life	 that	 love
surrenders	but	in	that	very	surrender	becomes	victorious
without	 any	 desire,	 without	 any	 motive	 victory	 comes	 on	 its	 own	 accord	 the
people	who	try	to	be	victorious	are	never	victorious
they	 can	 force	 others	 into	 submission,	 into	 slavery	 but	 they	 cannot	 win	 their
hearts	 --	 that's	 impossible	 the	 body	 can	 be	 made	 a	 slave	 it	 can	 be	 chained,
imprisoned,	killed,	destroyed	but	you	cannot	imprison	the	heart	and	the	heart	is
the	real	core	of	the	person	love	without	any	effort	to	conquer	reaches	to	the	very
core	 of	 the	 person	 it	 is	 the	 only	 victory	 there	 is	 all	 alexander	 the	 greats	 are
failures	utter	failures
only	lovers	have	known	the	taste	of	victory	and	it	depends	on	us
if	we	want	 to	 remain	beggars	go	on	struggling,	 fighting	 if	one	wants	 to	be	 the
emperor	then	surrender	to	existence,	relax	with	existence	be	in	a	state	of	loving
let-go	 and	 suddenly	 all	 is	 yours,	 the	whole	 kingdom	of	 god	 is	 yours	 love	 can
reach	to	its	ultimate	peak	only	when	it	becomes	friendliness	these	are	the	three
possibilities	for	love	one	is	lust	--	that	is	biological	nothing	wrong	about	it
but	it	is	the	lowest	form	of	energy	all	the	animals	have	it
nothing	 special	 about	 it	 if	 man	 has	 it	 lust	 joins	 humanity	 with	 the	 animal
kingdom	 it	 is	 a	 reproductive	 force	 it	 is	nature's	way	 to	continue	 the	 species	 to
remain	confined	to	lust	is	to	miss	the	real	point
one	 should	 go	 a	 little	 higher,	 then	 there	 is	 love	 love	 is	 not	 biological,	 it	 is
psychological	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	a	higher	dimension
it	is	not	reproductive,	it	is	creative	the	moment	two	persons	are	in	deep	love	all
their	creativity	explodes	they	may	start	 things	they	had	never	done	before	 they
may	start	painting,	they	may	start	music	they	may	start	dancing
things	they	had	never	dreamt	of	suddenly	start	arising	in	their	being	love	brings	a
new	climate
and	 new	 flowers	 start	 growing	 but	 very	 few	 people	 attain	 to	 love	 ninety-nine
point	nine	per	cent	of	people	remain	confined	 to	 the	animal	world,	 lust	 love	 is
freedom	from	being	an	animal	it	 is	 the	birth	of	the	human	being	there	is	still	a
higher	 peak	 than	 love	 because	 love	 although	 it	 is	 far	more	 beautiful	 than	 lust
tremendously	pregnant	with	creativity	has	still	some	hangover	of	lust	remaining
with	it	it	has	come	out	of	lust
something	of	lust	follows	it	like	a	shadow	it	becomes	a	shadow	but	it	is	there	and
it	goes	on	affecting
that's	 why	 love	 is	 possessive,	 jealous,	 envious	 these	 are	 ugly	 traits,	 they	 are
hangovers	of	the	past	they	destroy	the	beauty	of	love	and	as	love	starts	settling
these	 things	 start	 raising	 their	 heads	 so	 love	 is	 beautiful	 only	 when	 the
honeymoon	 is	on	and	 it	 is	not	 long;	 it	comes	and	goes	so	quickly	 that	when	 it
goes	then	only	you	know	it	was	there	and	then	there	is	something	which	is	not
love	 the	 shadow	 starts	 possessing	 you	 one	 can	 rise	 a	 little	 more	 when	 love
becomes	 just	 friendliness	 i	 am	not	 even	 calling	 it	 friendship	because	 that	may
give	you	the	idea	of	relationship	i	call	it	friendliness
when	love	becomes	just	a	friendliness	no	possessiveness,	no	jealousy	no	desire
to	dominate
when	 love	 starts	 giving	 freedom	 to	 the	 other	 total	 freedom,	 unconditional
freedom	then	it	becomes	friendliness	and	that	is	the	highest
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
human	consciousness	can	reach	very	few	people	have	known	friendliness	 their
names	can	be	counted	on	the	fingers	it	is	a	sad	thing	that	such	a	vast	humanity
goes	on	missing	 their	own	 intrinsic	potential	my	 sannyasins	have	 to	 transform
lust	into	love,	love	into	friendliness
the	moment	you	have	reached	to	the	state	of	friendliness	you	have	arrived	home
seriousness	 is	 like	 a	desert	 the	desert	 has	 to	be	 transformed	 into	 a	garden	you
need	a	green	revolution	love	can	do	that	miracle
only	love	can	do	that	miracle	love	is	the	only	beautiful	experience	which	is	non-
serious	 --	 it	 is	 playful	 hence	 all	 the	 religions	 have	 been	 denying	 love	 for	 the
simple	reason	that	with	 love	cannot	be	serious	and	seriousness	has	become	the
very	characteristic	of	the	saint	he	has	to	be	without	juice	just	like	a	dehydrated
fruit	the	more	dehydrated,	the	more	he	looks	like	a	saint	whenever	you	want	to
see	a	saint	you	can	just	see	a	dehydrated	prune	and	that	will	give	you	the	idea	of
all	the	saints	of	all	the	religions	all	the	juice	has	gone	out	love	is	juice
we	 in	 the	 east	 have	defined	god	 as	 god	has	 been	defined	nowhere	 else	 i	 have
never	 come	 across	 a	 better	 definition	 and	 i	 don	 think	 there	 exists	 any	 the
upanishads	 say	 raso	 vai	 saha	 --	 god	 is	 juice	 this	 ii	 a	 very	 strange	 definition
sometimes	i	wonder
i	may	have	written	that	upanishad	maybe	in	a	past	life
otherwise	who	would	do	it?
i	cannot	 find	anybody	else	doing	 it	 love	 is	non-serious,	 it	 is	alive,	 it	 is	playful
love	makes	life	fun,	a	celebration	and	my	whole	effort	here	is	to	create	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
for	the	first	time	in	the	whole	history	of	humanity	a	new	kind	of	religious	person
for	whom	laughter
is	far	more	valuable	than	prayer	tor	whom	playfulness
is	 far	more	 spiritual	 than	 seriousness	who	 should	be	closer	 to	 a	poet	 than	 to	 a
philosopher
closer	 to	music	 than	 to	mathematics	closer	 to	sensitivity	 rather	 than	being	dull
closed,	walled	from	all	sides,	afraid	of	life	escapist,	renouncing	life	--	no	that	is
not	 going	 to	 be	my	 sannyasins'	way	 instead	 of	 renouncing	 life	my	 sannyasins
have	 to	 rejoice	 in	 life	 and	 the	 way	 to	 rejoice	 is	 to	 love	 so	 drop	 all	 your
seriousness	 and	 it	 is	 only	 a	 question	 of	 seeing	 that	 seriousness	 is	 a	 barrier	 it
makes	you	closed	and	hard	it	does	not	allow	you	to	be	vulnerable	and	receptive
and	one	has	to	be	so	vulnerable	so	available	to	existence
that	the	wind,	the	rain,	the	sun	they	can	all	reach	to	your	very	heart	love	makes
one	 utterly	 contented	 because	 love	 is	 always	 an	 experience	 in	 the	 present	 you
don't	love	tomorrow
love	has	nothing	to	do	with	yesterdays	and	tomorrows
love	knows	only	one	time:	now	and	only	one	place:	here
that's	why	mind	feels	it	very	difficult	to	be	in	love
because	mind	is	always	concerned	with	the	future	or	with	the	past	those	are	the
two	 constant	 references	 for	 the	mind	 it	moves	 between	 past	 and	 future	 it	 is	 a
constant	shuttling	between	past	and	future	it	never	stops	in	the	middle	and	love
is	 exactly	 in	 the	middle	 love	 is	without	 any	nostalgia	 for	 the	past	 and	without
any	desire	in	the	future	hence	the	contentment
these	are	the	two	discontents	people	live	in	either	they	think	of	the	past	all	those
trains	that	they	have	missed	now	nothing	can	be	done	about	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	 is	 simply	 utter	 stupidity	 now	 there	 is	 no	 point	 in	 just	 going	 on	 reading	 the
timetable	of	the	trains	about	the	trains	that	you	have	missed	in	the	past	it	cannot
be	changed,	you	cannot	undo	it	but	mind	is	stupid,	mind	as	such	is	stupid	i	have
never	seen	an	intelligent	mind	the	heart	is	intelligent
and	mind	 is	 always	mediocre	 or	 one	 starts	 planning	 for	 the	 future	 and	 life	 is
passing	by	every	moment	hence	mind	has	a	condemnation	for	love	it	thinks	it	is
something	 crazy	 all	 the	 languages	 of	 the	world	 have	 this	 expression	 falling	 in
love	strange	--	why	do	all	the	languages	call	it	falling	in	love	--	why	not	rising	in
love?
it	is	mind's	condemnation,	mind	is	saying	you	have	fallen,	you	have	gone	cuckoo
you	have	lost	your	sanity
it	is	a	way	of	condemning
mind	lives	in	discontentment	and	condemns	love	which	is	absolute	contentment
mind	always	asks	for	more
that's	how	it	creates	discontentment	love	is	always	thankful
for	whatsoever	is	happening	love	always	feels	that
i	 am	getting	more	 than	 i	 am	worthy	of	 that	 i	 am	getting	 from	existence	 things
which	i	don't	deserve	at	all	i	have	not	earned	them,	they	are	coming	as	gifts	the
moment	you	start	 seeing	all	 the	gifts	 that	 existence	goes	on	 showering	on	you
how	can	one	remain	discontented?
and	out	of	a	contented	heart	thankfulness	arises	that	thankfulness	is	the	very	core
of	religion	of	real	religion
not	 of	 christianity,	 hinduism,	mohammedanism	 but	 of	 religiousness	 as	 such	 if
one	 can	 feel	 grateful	 to	 existence	 then	 there	 is	 no	 need	 to	 believe	 in	 any
theology,	any	doctrine,	any	dogma	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	thankfulness	is	enough	deep	in	the	himalayas,	from	virgin	peaks	where	snow
has	 never	 melted,	 the	 ganges	 starts	 the	 point	 where	 ganges	 starts	 is	 called
gangotri	it	is	a	very	small	place
just	a	small	face	of	a	cow	somebody	has	sculpted	a	rock	into	the	face	of	a	cow
and	 from	 that	 face	 of	 the	 cow	 the	 great	 river	 ganges	 starts	 it	 starts	 as	 a	 small
stream	 and	 then	 goes	 on	 becoming	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 and	 bigger	 finally	 it
becomes	the	very	ocean	itself	that's	also	the	way	of	love	it	starts	in	a	very	small
way	but	one	should	not	stop	there	one	should	go	on	flowing,	moving	love	should
never	become	static	it	should	remain	dynamic
the	moment	 it	becomes	 static	 it	 starts	 stinking	 the	moment	 it	becomes	 static	 it
loses	 the	 freshness	of	a	 river,	 the	aliveness	of	a	 river	 it	becomes	 just	a	muddy
pool	people	call	it	marriage
it	was	just	a	muddy	pool	and	such	a	small	pool	and	they	go	on	round	and	round
chasing	each	other	and	creating	more	mud
and	throwing	mud	at	each	other	love	should	be	a	river,	always	moving	from	the
known	 into	 the	 unknown	 and	 from	 the	 unknown	 towards	 the	 unknowable	 the
beginning	has	 to	be	small	but	 the	end	has	 to	be	 the	 infinite,	 the	oceanic	 if	one
can	 remain	 aware	of	 it	 then	 love	 is	 all	 that	 there	 is	 to	 spirituality	 except	 love,
whatsoever	 goes	 on	 in	 the	 name	 of	 spirituality	 is	 all	 bullshit	 esoteric	 bullshit,
occult	bullshit	remember	it	--	because	it	 is	very	easy	to	fall	 into	that	bullshit	 it
has	great	attraction
it	 has	 great	 systems	 of	 thought	 and	 strange	 ideas	 and	 all	 inventions	 of	 crafty
people	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
life	is	very	simple	--	so	is	love	and	if	you	can	remember	these	three	l's	like	three
r's:	 life,	 love,	 light	 nothing	 else	 is	 needed	 to	 be	 remembered	 live	 totally,	 live
lovingly	 and	 live	 not	 in	 a	 state	 of	 unconsciousness	 live	 consciously	 --	 that	 is
living	with	light	just	these	three	words	are	enough	and	one	need	not	bother	about
anything	 else	 knowledge	 is	 of	 the	 mind,	 wisdom	 is	 of	 the	 heart	 the	 way	 of
knowledge	is	logic	the	way	of	wisdom	is	love
initiation	into	sannyas	simply	means	getting	out	of	your	logical	structure	of	the
mind	 and	 entering	 your	 own	 ignored	 world	 of	 love	 the	 schools,	 colleges,
universities	 they	 exist	 precisely	 for	 one	 purpose	 that	 is	 to	 force	 every	 child
towards	the	logical	structure	they	force	every	child	to	ignore	the	love	energy	and
once	you	get	imprisoned	in	the	logical	structure	of	the	mind	you	become	almost
like	 a	 machine,	 a	 biocomputer	 and	 that's	 what	 the	 society	 needs	 the	 church
needs,	 the	 state	 needs:	 biocomputers	 they	 don't	 need	 human	 beings	 they	 are
afraid	of	real,	authentic	individuals	because	those	individuals	will	be	rebellious
they	cannot	be	manipulated,	dominated	they	cannot	be	enslaved
our	whole	so-called	civilisation	eastern,	western	--	both	--	are	 just	strategies	of
destroying	 freedom,	 destroying	 the	 individual	 destroying	 his	 love	 and	 forcing
him	 to	be	 just	 an	efficient	machine	because	doctors	 are	needed,	professors	 are
needed	mechanics	are	needed	scientists	are	needed	the	society	has	no	use	for	the
lover	the	state	does	not	need	any	lover	the	church	has	no	utility	for	love	and	up
to	now	we	have	lived	in	a	very	utilitarian	way
and	 love	 is	non-purposive,	non-utilitarian	but	 it	 is	 love	 that	brings	 insight	 into
the	mystery	of	life
it	is	not	a	commodity
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	 cannot	 be	 part	 of	 the	 marketplace	 but	 without	 it	 you	 can	 never	 be	 ecstatic
without	it	you	can	never	be	in	tune	with	existence	it	is	fundamentally	the	need	of
the	individual	not	of	the	collective,	the	mob,	the	crowd,	the	society	so	a	shift	is
needed,	one	has	to	change	the	gears	from	the	head	to	the	heart	and	the	moment
your	energy	starts	moving	into	the	heart
you	will	have	such	an	experience	of	freedom	such	a	 tremendous	experience	of
expansiveness	that	you	will	not	be	able	to	believe	that	this	was	possible	to	me	it
looks	impossible
when	 it	happens	 for	 the	 first	 time,	unbelievable	because	we	have	been	 told	by
these	fools	for	centuries
that	it	happens	only	to	a	christ	because	he	is	the	only	begotten	son	of	god	not	to
everybody
or	it	happens	to	gautam	the	buddha	because	he	is	a	reincarnation	of	god	not	to
everybody	else
this	is	absolutely	wrong
it	 is	 everybody's	 birthright	 it	 can	 happen	 to	 everybody	 just	 a	 simple	 shift,	 a
change	 of	 the	 gestalt	 from	 the	 head	 to	 the	 heart,	 from	 logic	 to	 love	 and	 you
become	entitled
to	all	the	miracles	of	existence	love	can	either	be	very	noisy	as	ordinarily	it	is
or	it	can	be	utterly	silent	when	love	is	noisy	it	creates	more	anxiety	more	anguish
than	you	had	ever	suffered	before	one	woman	was	saying	to	her	lover	now	that
we	are	going	to	be	married	you	should	be	happy	--	i	will	be	there	always	to	share
all	your	suffering,	problems,	anxiety	but	the	man	said	i	don't	have	any	problems,
anxieties,	and	suffering	the	woman	said	i	am	not	talking	about	now	i	am	talking
about	after	marriage	the	bachelors	think	the	married	people	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
are	living	a	really	happy	life	if	somebody	thinks	that	married	people	are	living	a
happy	 life	 that	 simply	 shows	 that	 he	 is	 a	 bachelor,	 nothing	 else	 it	 is	 really	 a
mystery	 why	 people	 get	 married	 and	 there	 are	 a	 few	 people	 who	 even	 get
married	twice	that	is	a	bigger	mistake
that	is	impossible	to	conceive	once	one	can	understand,	but	twice	if	one	is	a	little
intelligent	he	will	not	commit	the	mistake	even	once	this	is	happening	because
love	 the	 ordinary	 love	 --	 is	 more	 like	 a	 fever	 it	 is	 more	 like	 an	 infection,	 a
contagious	disease	in	fact,	vd,	to	be	exact
unless	 love	 becomes	meditative	 it	 remains	 a	 disease	 only	meditation	 takes	 the
fever	out	of	it	and	makes	it	a	cool	phenomenon	not	cold	but	cool
ordinarily	 it	 is	 hot,	 a	 very	 hot	 affair	 but	 anything	 that	 is	 very	 hot	 is	 bound	 to
become	cold	sooner	or	later	even	with	central	heating	it	is	going	to	become	cold
that's	the	nature	of	things	but	there	is	a	point	between	hot	and	cold	exactly	in	the
middle
which	 is	 the	 point	 of	 coolness	 meditation	 creates	 that	 coolness	 and	 when
meditation
has	created	a	coolness	inside	you	and	love	starts	coming	through	that	coolness	it
has	a	 totally	different	 flavour	a	different	perfume,	 a	different	quality	 it	 is	very
liberating
but	silence	should	be	the	source	of	love	not	the	noisy	mind	but	a	silent	centre	of
your	being	love	should	come	from	the	innermost	shrine	cool,	silent,	meditative,
aware,	alert,	watchful	then	love	can	give	you
the	most	beautiful	experiences	of	life	it	can	give	you	the	master	key	that	opens
all	the	locks	of	all	the	mysteries	of	existence	but	silence	is	a	must
without	silence	love	simply	drives	people	insane	and	silence	is	very	easy
love	is	a	togetherness
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
silence	simply	means
entering	 into	 your	 aloneness	 before	 you	 enter	 into	 somebody's	 being	 into
somebody's	life
you	 have	 to	 be	 acquainted	with	 your	 own	 aloneness	 you	 have	 to	 be	 rooted	 in
your	aloneness	you	have	to	know	exactly	what	your	aloneness	is	only	then	can
love	blossom	out	of	it	it	is	just	like	friedrich	nietzsche	says	if	a	tree	wants	to	rise
upwards	to	touch	the	stars	in	the	sky	then	its	roots	have	to	go	downwards	to	the
very	 rock-bottom	 of	 existence	 unless	 the	 roots	 go	 deeper	 the	 tree	 cannot	 go
higher
the	 tree	 and	 the	 roots	 have	 to	 balance	 each	 other	 in	 the	 same	 proportion	 they
have	to	grow	one	in	depth,	one	in	height	love	is	like	a	tree	trying	to	reach	to	the
stars	the	longing	for	the	stars
and	meditation	is	growing	roots	inwards	deeper,	to	the	very	rock-bottom	of	your
being	when	the	roots	reach	to	your	ultimate	silence	the	space	where	one	hears
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
then	your	tree	can	blossom	into	the	sky	can	have	a	dialogue	with	the	stars	love
has	 failed	 in	 the	 world	 because	 meditation	 was	 not	 the	 source	 of	 it	 love	 can
succeed	 and	 love	 has	 to	 succeed	 otherwise	 humanity	 is	 doomed	 only	 with	 a
meditative	 background	 so	my	whole	 teaching	 here	 is	 to	 do	 two	 things	 one,	 to
help	you	to	become	meditative	to	reach	your	absolute	intimate	and	private	being
and	the	second	part	is,	to	grow	into	love	when	meditation	blossoms	into	love	a
man	is	no	more	a	man
he	has	transcended	humanity	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	 can	 only	 call	 him	 a	 god	 a	 buddha,	 a	 jesus,	 a	 krishna	The	Sound	of	One
Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#14
Chapter	title:	None
14	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103145
ShortTitle:	CLAPP14
Audio:
No
Video:
No
mind	is	a	coward,	mind	is	basically	fear-oriented	it	is	always	suspicious
always	doubting,	always	on	guard	mind	creates	a	situation	in	which	you	feel	a
stranger	to	existence
because	of	all	those	suspicions	that	mistrust	disconnects	one	from	all	that	is	and
then	there	arises	a	vicious	circle	the	more	you	feel	lonely,	an	outsider	the	more
afraid	you	become	because	the	vast	universe	seems	to	be	inimical	this	is	mind's
projection
and	if	the	whole	existence	is	inimical	to	you	naturally,	you	become	more	afraid
the	more	 afraid	you	become	 the	more	 the	universe	 seems	 to	be	 inimical	 that's
how	mind	goes	on	shrinking	into	itself	closing	its	doors,	windows.	out	of	fear	it
becomes	a	windowless,	encapsulated	existence	and	out	of	that	arises	all	suffering
misery,	greed,	anger
mind	is	the	creator	of	the	hell	around	the	heart	is	always	brave
because	 the	 heart	 cannot	 doubt	 just	 as	 the	mind	 cannot	 trust	 the	 heart	 simply
trusts	--	it	is	its	nature	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	the	religions	have	been	creating	a	very	difficult	situation	for	man	they	tell	to
you	believe
but	that	belief	is	going	to	be	of	the	mind	and	any	belief	of	the	mind	is	carrying
within	it	all	its	doubts	because	that	is	not	the	nature	of	the	mind	the	christian,	the
hindu,	the	mohammedan	they	are	all	believers
but	belief	is	part	of	the	mind	hence	it	can	never	be	true	it	is	always	superficial,
not	even	skin-deep	scratch	it	a	little	bit
and	 you	will	 find	 all	 the	 doubts	 hiding	 behind	 it	 i	 don't	 say	 to	my	 sannyasins
believe	 that's	what	 has	 been	 driving	 the	whole	 of	 humanity	 crazy	 i	 say	 to	my
sannyasins
move	your	energy	from	the	mind	to	the	heart	and	then	there	is	 trust	--	 it	 is	not
belief	 belief	 is	 a	 suppression	 of	 doubt	 and	 trust	 is	 absence	 of	 doubt	 that	 is	 a
totally	different	phenomenon	of	 tremendous	beauty	and	of	 immense	 innocence
and	 the	way	 to	move	 from	 the	mind	 to	 the	heart	 is	becoming	silent,	more	and
more	 silent	mind	 is	noisy,	heart	 is	 silent	 so	one	has	 to	 renounce	 the	noise	and
slowly	slowly,	imbibe	the	spirit	of	silence	a	moment	comes	when	you	can	hear
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
and	 that	 is	 the	moment	of	ultimate	 transformation	 then	you	are	 really	born	 for
the	first	time	then	one	is	not	a	christian	or	a	hindu	or	a	mohammedan	or	a	jew
one	is	simply	religious
because	of	that	trust,	that	silence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	 quality,	 a	 totally	 new	 quality	 arises	 in	 your	 being	 that	 quality	 i	 call
religiousness	aloneness	and	silence
are	 two	 aspects	 of	 one	 experience	 two	 sides	 of	 the	 same	 coin	 if	 one	wants	 to
experience	silence	one	has	to	go	into	one's	total	aloneness	it	is	there
we	are	born	alone,	we	die	alone	between	these	two	realities	we	create	a	thousand
and	one	illusions	of	being	together	all	kinds	of	relationships	friends	and	enemies,
loves	and	hates	nations,	races,	religions
we	create	all	kinds	of	hallucinations	just	to	avoid	one	fact
that	we	are	alone
but	whatsoever	we	do,	the	truth	cannot	be	changed	it	is	so,	and	rather	than	trying
to	escape	from	it	the	best	way	is	to	rejoice	in	it	rejoicing	in	your	own	aloneness
is	what	meditation	 is	 all	 about	 the	meditator	 is	 one	who	dives	 deep	 into	one's
aloneness
knowing	that	we	are	born	alone	we	will	be	dying	alone
and	deep	down	we	are	living	alone	so	why	not	experience	what	this	aloneness	is
it	is	our	very	nature,	our	very	being	because	of	this	aloneness
two	possibilities	open	up
one,	to	escape	from	it
then	whatsoever	you	do	in	the	name	of	love	is	false	because	you	don't	love	the
person	you	are	simply	trying	to	find	an	excuse	in	the	other	person	to	escape	from
yourself	and	the	other	is	also	doing	the	same	it	is	a	very	negative	kind	of	love	the
other	is	trying	to	escape	from	his	or	her	aloneness
and	 you	 are	 just	 an	 excuse	 the	 person	 who	 chooses	 the	 first	 alternative	 of
escaping	from	one's	reality	becomes	pseudo	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
in	all	his	love,	in	all	his	relationships	the	second	alternative	is	to	experience	your
aloneness,	 your	 silence	 that	 absolutely	 virgin	 spot	 inside	 your	 being	 where
nobody	can	enter,	nobody	can	trespass	that	is	your	true	world
knowing	 it,	 experiencing	 it,	 one	 is	 surprised	 that	 there	was	 no	 need	 to	 escape
from	it	it	is	one	of	the	most	ecstatic	experiences	even	love	is	secondary
the	 person	 who	 has	 known	 his	 aloneness	 also	 loves	 but	 his	 love	 has	 a
tremendous	beauty	t	is	positive:	he	is	not	escaping	from	himself	he	is	rooted	in
himself,	centred	in	himself	and	because	of	that	rootedness	and	centering	he	is	so
full	of	joy	that	he	wants	to	share	it	his	love	is	a	sharing,	it	 is	not	an	escape	his
love	is	a	gift
the	other	is	not	being	used	as	a	means	the	other	is	dignified	by	his	love	ordinarily
love	reduces	people	into	slaves	into	bondage,	into	possessiveness,	into	jealousy
into	all	kinds	of	ugly	things	real	love	is	a	by-product	of	the	experience	of	silence
and	aloneness
i	teach	meditation
and	i	teach	love	through	meditation	when	love	is	grounded	in	meditation	then	it
is	alive
then	it	is	exactly	synonymous	with	god	then	it	brings	freedom
and	it	brings	great	blessings	and	benedictions	very	few	people	have	known	really
what	 love	 is	 because	 very	 few	 people	 have	 entered	 into	 their	 own	 innermost,
silent,	alone	space	a	sannyasin	has	to	do	only	one	thing	he	has	to	rejoice	in	his
aloneness	then	love	comes	just	like	a	shadow	of	its	own	accord
one	can	cultivate	a	certain	kind	of	silence	by	chanting	mantra
by	other	auto-hypnotic	methods	by	 focussing	on	something	constantly	one	can
create	a	kind	of	silence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	that	is	pseudo
it	is	really	a	state	of	dullness,	not	silence	it	is	a	state	closer	to	sleep	not	closer	to
awakening
methods	 like	 transcendental	 meditation	 are	 nothing	 but	 non-medicinal
tranquillisers	if	you	repeat	a	certain	mantra	continuously	the	very	repetition	is	so
boring	 that	 the	mind	becomes	 tired,	exhausted	 in	 that	 tiredness	and	exhaustion
certainly	it	stops	but	that	is	not	true	silence,	it	is	very	cheap	it	is	only	a	trick	and
anybody	can	manage	 it	 in	 the	name	of	 religion,	 spirituality	 it	 is	 selling	 simple
auto-hypnosis	i	am	not	in	favour	of	such	a	silence	the	real	silence	happens
when	you	start	watching	the	noise	of	your	mind	there	is	a	constant	traffic	in	the
mind	thoughts,	memories,	imagination	thousands	of	desires
it	is	always	a	crowd	moving	in	all	directions	if	you	can	stand	by	the	side	of	the
road	 and	 just	 watch,	 without	 any	 evaluation,	 judgment	 without	 condemning
something	or	appreciating	something
just	sitting	on	the	bank	of	the	river	watching	the	flow	of	the	river	unconcerned,
detached,	just	being	a	pure	witness	then	the	miracle	happens
as	your	witnessing	deepens	the	traffic	on	the	road	of	the	mind	starts	dispersing,
in	 the	 same	 proportion	 when	 the	 witness	 is	 zero	 per	 cent	 the	 traffic	 is	 one
hundred	per	cent	--	it	is	rush	hour	when	the	witness	is	fifty	per	cent	the	traffic	is
fifty	per	cent	when	the	witness	is	ninety-nine	per	cent	the	traffic	is	only	one	per
cent	 and	when	 the	witness	 is	one	hundred	per	 cent	 totally	 there,	with	absolute
awareness	the	traffic	disappears
and	to	see	the	empty	mind	is	true	silence	then	silence	explodes
from	the	innermost	core	of	your	being	then	it	 is	 like	a	 lotus	flower	opening	its
petals	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	 silence	 is	 liberating	 i	 teach	only	 that	 kind	of	 silence	 silence	 is	 not	 a	 dead
thing	 the	 so-called	 religious	 people	 the	 saints	 and	 the	 spiritual	 leaders	 of
mankind	 if	 you	 look	 at	 them	 you	 will	 get	 the	 idea	 that	 silence	 seems	 to	 be
something	dead	because	 they	are	not	 really	 silent	 they	are	boiling	within,	 they
have	 repressed	 their	 thoughts,	 desires,	 everything	 they	 are	 sitting	 on	 top	 of	 a
volcano	when	your	mind	is	just	repressed	you	get	something	dead
then	it	is	a	silence	of	a	graveyard	but	that	is	not	worth	achieving	in	fact	the	noise
of	the	mind	is	far	better	at	least	it	is	alive
compared	to	a	dead	silence	the	noise	of	the	mind	is	far	more	valuable,	because	it
is	alive	 i	am	always	 in	favour	of	 life	for	example,	 i	would	 like	an	alive	 insane
man	more	than	a	dead	corpse
it	may	be	 the	corpse	of	a	saint	but	 the	 insane	man	is	at	 least	alive	and	life	has
possibilities	the	insane	can	become	sane	but	that	corpse	of	the	saint	cannot	come
back	to	life	silence	has	to	be	alive,	vibrating	pulsating,	dancing,	singing	it	has	to
be	the	experience	of	inner	music	then	one	has	to	move	in	a	totally	different	way
repression	is	not	the	way	to	attain	to	true	silence,	alive	silence	a	silence	full	of
music	and	song	and	dance	understanding	is	the	way
never	repress	anger:	understand	it	never	repress	greed:	understand	it	repression
should	not	be	a	word	in	the	vocabulary	of	a	sannyasin	understanding	should	be
substituted	because	through	understanding	one	transcends	the	moment	you	have
understood	your	anger	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	are	no	more	angry
the	 energy	 of	 the	 anger	 is	 released	 from	 its	 old	 pattern	 through	 understanding
and	that	same	energy	becomes	compassion	the	moment	you	have	understood	the
noise	of	the	mind
the	same	energy	becomes
the	music	of	your	inner	being	man	has	not	to	deny	anything	in	him	because	all
that	is	there	is	immensely	pregnant	we	have	to	find	out	--	with	love,	with	insight
what	is	hidden	there
then	 even	 things	 like	 jealousy,	 the	 ego	 possessiveness,	 the	 desire	 to	 dominate,
ambition	all	are	transformed
you	need	not	cut	anything	from	your	life	we	have	to	absorb	all	the	energies	then
only	can	one	have	the	inner	orchestra	because	these	are	the	people	greed,	anger,
ego
which	will	play	on	different	instruments	of	your	being
these	 are	 the	 musicians	 --	 if	 you	 start	 killing	 them	 distorting	 them,	 throwing
them	out	you	will	be	left	only	with	instruments	and	no	musicians
that's	what	happens	to	your	so-called	saints	they	are	sitting	there
with	 all	 kinds	 of	 instruments,	 surrounded	 but	 there	 is	 nobody	 to	 play	 all	 the
energy	 has	 oozed	 out	 of	 them	 they	 themselves	 have	 thrown	 it	 out	 it	 is	 sheer
foolishness
energy	 is	 neither	 bad	 nor	 good	 it	 all	 depends	 on	 how	 you	 use	 it	 so	 let
understanding	be	the	only	law	the	only	discipline
and	one	can	come	to	a	very	alive	silence	a	silence	which	is	also	a	celebration	it	is
our	noise	that	is	keeping	us	asleep	the	noise	of	the	head	functions	like	a	lullaby
and	it	keeps	you	asleep
even	while	you	think	you	are	awake	you	are	not	truly	awake	because	just	below
the	 thin	 layer	of	your	 so-called	wakeful	 state	 there	 is	 a	deep	 layer	of	 constant
noise	that	goes	on	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
day	 in,	 day	 out	 --	 it	 is	 a	 constant	 lullaby	 it	 allows	 you	 only	 a	 little	 bit	 of
awareness	just	a	little	bit	that	is	necessary	for	day-to-day	work	going	to	the	once,
coming	back	to	the	home	eating	your	food,	going	to	your	bed	just	a	very	small
quantity	of	awareness	is	needed	for	all	these	things	in	fact	people	go	on	doing	all
these	things	almost	mechanically
if	you	eat	your	food	every	day	at	twelve	o'clock	and	somebody	has	played	a	trick
on	you	it	is	not	twelve	o'clock,	it	is	only	ten	and	somebody	has	fixed	your	clock
on	twelve	looking	at	the	clock	you	will	suddenly	feel	hunger	which	is	absolutely
false,	mechanical	it	is	not	there,	it	is	your	imagination	it	is	just	a	projection,	just
an	idea,	a	dream	and	while	you	are	eating
you	 simply	go	on	 stuffing	yourself	 not	 knowing	what	 you	 are	 doing	 the	mind
may	 be	 somewhere	 else	 --	 in	 timbuctoo	 in	 constantinople,	 in	 istanbul	 --
anywhere	any	stupid	place	but	not	on	the	dining	table	where	you	are	sitting
the	mind	is	a	great	tourist	it	is	always	somewhere	else	and	you	are	doing,	eating
or	 taking	a	bath	 just	 like	a	machine,	 just	 like	a	robot	 it	has	become	a	habit,	so
slowly	slowly	even	a	little	bit	of	awareness	is	not	there	one	simply	goes	on	doing
mechanical	gestures	when	you	say	to	somebody	hi,	how	are	you	you	don't	mean
anything
in	 fact	you	were	not	even	 thinking	 to	say	 it	when	you	say	 it	you	are	surprised
why	are	you	saying	it
it	is	just	there	like	a	gramophone	record	it	works	autonomously
the	moment	you	see	some	face	which	seems	to	be	familiar	it	looks	as	if	you	have
seen	 him	 somewhere	 the	 gramophone	 record	 simply	 starts	 turning	 on	 this
constant	noise	inside	is	the	barrier	to	awakening	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
silence	does	just	the	opposite	it	helps	you	to	be	awake
hence	initiation	into	sannyas	is	really	initiation	into	silence
sannyas	 is	 another	name	 for	 silence	become	more	 and	more	 silent	 allow	more
and	more	silent	spaces	to	yourself	and	as	you	will	become	silent	you	will	see	a
new	kind	of	awakening	happening	 to	you	a	new	awareness	arising	 in	you	new
insight	 into	 things,	new	understandings	which	will	 transform	all	your	activities
when	 a	 person	 attains	 to	 total	 silence	 he	 becomes	 a	 flame	 of	 awareness	 he
becomes	a	buddha,	the	awakened	one	that's	the	ultimate	goal
i	don't	believe	in	religions	my	emphasis	is	on	religiousness	religions	are	bound
to	divide	humanity	that's	what	they	have	done	in	the	past	the	whole	of	humanity
is	 divided	 into	 camps	 inimical	 to	 each	 other,	 and	 the	 things	 they	 have	 been
fighting	 about	 with	 each	 other	 are	 so	 stupid	 and	 ridiculous	 one	 religion	 says
there	are	seven	heavens	another	says	there	are	only	three	and	that's	enough	for	a
crusade	it	has	to	be	proved	in	a	war	who	is	right	great	theologians	of	the	middle
ages	were	engaged	in	a	great	debate	that	continued	for	centuries	the	debate	was
how	many	angels	can	dance
the	point	of	a	needle
now	these	are	the	people	who	have	been	dominating	humanity	guiding	humanity
towards	truth
these	fools,	utterly	insane,	are	the	leaders	the	great	moral	teachers
if	you	look	into	religious	doctrines,	dogmas	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	 will	 be	 surprised	 --	 the	 whole	 thing	 seems	 to	 be	 so	 pointless,	 utterly
meaningless	but	so	much	energy	has	been	wasted	and	the	whole	of	humanity
has	been	turned	into	small	fragments	hence	i	am	not	interested	in	any	dogma	any
creed,	any	doctrine,	any	theology	i	don't	teach	you	principles	i	simply	want	you
to	imbibe	the	spirit	of	religiousness	and	that	is	possible	only	through	silence	not
through	argumentation
not	 by	 reading	 the	 scriptures	 not	 by	 cramming	 scriptures	 like	 parrots	 because
that	will	only	increase	your	inner	noise	it	is	already	too	much
silence	can	be	attained	only	if	we	understand	that	language	is	needed	for	outside
communication	 it	 is	 not	needed	 for	your	 inner	 exploration	 at	 all	 because	 there
you	are	alone	there	is	nobody	to	talk	to	language	is	a	social	phenomenon	needed
of	course	when	you	go	to	the	marketplace	and	if	you	want	to	purchase	bananas
language	is	needed
if	 you	 just	 stand	 silently	 there	 they	 will	 think	 you	 are	 a	 banana	 in	 the
marketplace,	 in	 the	 outside	 world	 when	 you	 are	 communicating	 with	 people
about	things,	objects,	it's	perfectly	adequate,	valid	but	when	you	turn	in
all	use	of	language	is	finished	there	comes	a	full	point
there	is	no	need	to	carry	the	language	in	and	with	the	language	dropped	the	mind
is	dropped	because	mind	is	only	the	mechanism	for	language,	for	thoughts	mind
is	basically	an	instrument	for	dialogue	but	when	you	are	moving	in	there	is	no
question	of	dialogue	because	there	are	not	two
who	are	going	to	discuss,	argue,	communicate	you	are	one
hence	 silence	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 discover	 oneself	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 have
discovered	yourself	you	will	have	a	quality,	a	very	subtle	quality	like	a	fragrance
surrounding	a	rose	that	quality	i	call	religiousness	it	is	deep	love	for	all
it	is	unconditional	love	for	the	whole	existence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
silence	has	many	aspects	to	it	it	is	multi-dimensional
on	the	bush	of	silence
thousands	of	flowers	blossom	of	different	colours,	of	different	fragrances	and	the
brightest	of	them	all	is	an	inner	glow,	inner	light	the	last	words	of	buddha	to	his
disciples	were	be	a	light	unto	yourself
he	was	 dying	 so	 nobody	 could	 ask	 him	how?	how	 should	 one	 be	 a	 light	 unto
oneself?
and	it	is	not	appropriate	at	all	to	ask	him	when	he	is	leaving	the	world	and	he	has
given	his	last	message	it	condenses	his	whole	life's	teachings	but	when	he	died
great	quarrel,	argumentation	discussion	arose	amongst	the	disciples	what	does	he
mean	 by	 be	 a	 light	 unto	 yourself	 and	 of	 course	 he	 was	 no	 more	 there
immediately	 thirty-two	 sects	 arose	 thirty-two	 interpretations	 of	 this	 simple
sentence	be	a	light	unto	yourself
the	only	person	who	was	not	involved	at	all	in	this	argumentation	was	manjushri
one	of	his	great	disciples	he	was	sitting	under	his	tree	many	came	and	asked
manjushri,	you	are	one	of	 the	oldest	disciples	what	do	you	think	about	 the	 last
statement	 we	 are	 very	 much	 agitated	 --	 what	 does	 it	 mean	 and	 it	 is	 really
significant	because	it	 is	his	last	statement	it	 is	his	whole	condensed	philosophy
of	 life	manjushri	did	not	 say	a	 single	word	again	and	again	 they	asked	and	he
remained	 silent	 finally	he	 said	you	 cannot	 understand	because	 i	 am	answering
you	--	this	is	the	only	way	to	be	a	light	unto	yourself	if	you	become	silent
and	all	these	fools	who	are	arguing	they	will	argue	for	centuries	they	will	never
know	the	light	that	is	within	themselves
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
be	silent,	be	still	--	and	the	light	is	there	just	because	of	the	cloud	of	your	noise
you	cannot	see	it
as	the	dust	cloud	settles
suddenly	the	flame	is	seen	and	to	see	one's	own	inner	light	is	to	see	the	eternal,
the	ultimate,	the	deathless	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#15
Chapter	title:	None
15	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103155
ShortTitle:	CLAPP15
Audio:
No
Video:
No
man	lives	in	a	state	of	turmoil	for	the	simple	reason
that	 he	 is	 divided	 into	many	 fragments	 and	 all	 those	 fragments	 are	 fighting	 to
dominate	man	has	not	got	one	self,	he	has	got	many	selves	the	idea	of	one	mind
is	very	false	man	is	poly-psychic:	he	is	many	minds	he	is	a	crowd	and	of	course
the	 crowd	 cannot	 be	 peaceful	 there	 is	 continuous	 competition	 each	 fragment
trying	 to	come	up	on	 the	 top	 there	 is	great	politics	 in	everybody's	 inner	world
unless	 this	 whole	 politics	 ceases	 there	 is	 no	 possibility	 of	 peace	 at	 the	 most
people	can	manage	just	a	facade	of	peace,	just	on	the	surface	but	deep	down	they
are	boiling	deep	down	there	is	always	war	sometimes	hot,	sometimes	cold,	but
no	peace	in	fact	the	only	way	to	be	peaceful	is	to	help	all	these	fragments	melt
into	 oneness	 unless	 that	 integration	 happens	 one	 can	 befool	 others	 that	 one	 is
living	in	peace	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	one	cannot	befool	existence	and	one	cannot	befool	oneself	either	one	knows
all	the	time
that	one	 is	 sitting	on	a	volcano	which	can	erupt	any	moment	one	can	go	mad,
one	 can	 murder	 one	 can	 commit	 suicide	 --	 everything	 is	 possible	 and	 just	 a
moment	 before	 the	man	was	 so	 sane	 so	 gentlemanly,	 so	 virtuous,	 so	 religious
and	within	a	moment	he	can	start	falling	apart	he	was	somehow	holding	himself
together	but	there	cannot	be	joy
in	somehow	holding	oneself	together	joy	comes	only	with	a	centering	when	all
your	 parts	melt,	merge	 and	 become	one	 that	moment	 is	 the	moment	 of	 divine
peace	it	is	possible	through	meditation	because	meditation	takes	you	out	of	your
fragments	meditation	 is	 a	 simple	 process	 of	watching	 all	 that	 goes	 on	 in	 your
mind	 just	 keeping	 a	 little	 distance,	 just	 being	 a	 witness	 and	 that	 witnessing
brings	the	greatest	miracle	suddenly	you	start	feeling	yourself	separate	from	all
the	fighting	fragments	and	that	is	the	beginning	of	integration	you	have	found	a
centre	which	 is	not	 in	conflict	you	have	 found	a	cool	space,	a	spot	within	you
which	 remains	 unaffected,	 detached	 once	 this	 cool	 spot	 is	 found	 all	 fighting
starts	disappearing	it	is	as	if	the	master	has	come	and	the	servants	immediately
surrender	or,	think	of	a	small	children's	class	the	teacher	is	not	there	and	there	is
great	 noise	 and	 fighting	 is	 going	 on	 and	 children	 are	 throwing	 things	 at	 each
other	--
which	 is	natural	 for	children	 the	moment	 the	 teacher	enters	 suddenly	a	 silence
descends,	a	peace	all	fighting	has	disappeared	the	same	happens	when	you	have
found	a	cool	spot	within	you
i	call	my	sannyasins	swamis	 the	word	swami	means	 the	master	swa	means	 the
centre	of	your	being	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	swami	means	one	who	has	found	it	finding	one's	centre
is	the	beginning	of	a	divine	dimension	--
then	all	 is	peace,	 then	flowers	of	peace	go	on	blossoming;	endlessly	ordinarily
man	 is	 almost	 asleep	 only	 a	 very	 small	 thin	 layer	 of	 consciousness	 is	 there,
otherwise	 his	 whole	 being	 is	 in	 darkness	 and	 unconsciousness	 this	 depth	 of
unconsciousness	and	unawareness	has	to	be	transformed
unless	your	whole	being	becomes	conscious	you	cannot	experience	the	meaning
of	 life	 and	 without	 experiencing	 the	 meaning	 of	 your	 life	 you	 will	 not	 know
whether	 god	 exists	 or	 not	 god	 is	 nothing	 but	 the	 experience	 of	 meaning	 in
existence
god	is	not	a	person	but	an	existential	experience	that	life	is	significant,	that	it	is
not	accidental	that	there	is	a	hidden,	deep	meaning	in	it	but	the	only	way	to	find
it	is	to	dive	within	your	own	being	the	vigilant	spirit	has	to	be	grown	supported,
nourished
a	sannyasin	has	to	become	a	gardener	because	ordinarily
one	need	not	have	much	awareness	this	small	awareness	that	is	naturally	given
to	us	 is	enough	for	 the	day-to-day	 life	earning	your	 livelihood,	managing	your
family	etcetera	--	it	is	enough	for	that	but	life	is	a	vast	phenomenon	it	is	not	just
earning	 your	 livelihood	 you	 can	 manage	 a	 good	 standard	 of	 living	 but	 the
standard	of	living	is	not	going	to	help	you	to	live	truly,	authentically	the	standard
of	living	is	not	really	the	measurement	of	how	alive	you	are
one	becomes	alive	only	as	one	becomes	aware	but	we	have	enough	awareness	it
is	 just	 like	a	seed	--	all	 that	 is	needed	is	a	 little	gardening,	a	 little	effort	so	 the
seed	can	dissolve	into	the	soil	and	can	start	growing	into	a	tree	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
we	have	the	seed	--	initiation	into	sannyas	means	a	commitment,	a	decision	that	i
am	going	to	transform	this	seed,	this	potential	into	a	realisation
once	this	decision	settles	and	sinks	in	your	being	it	is	not	difficult	to	grow	into
awareness	one	has	to	work	in	three	dimensions	the	first	dimension	is	the	body:
one	has	to	be	more	alert	of	what	one	is	doing	with	the	body	--
walking,	eating,	lying	down	on	the	bed,	relaxing	all	the	actions	of	the	body	have
to	 be	 watched	 they	 should	 not	 be	 done	 robotlike,	 mechanically	 the	 second
dimension	 is	 the	 mind:	 one	 has	 to	 watch	 thoughts,	 desires,	 memories	 just
watching	what	is	going	on	inside	what	moves	in	the	mind
and	the	third	dimension	is	the	heart	the	emotions,	the	moods,	the	feelings	--
one	has	to	watch	them
if	one	continues	watching	these	three	dimensions...
this	 is	 the	 true	 trinity	of	 life	not	god	 the	father	and	christ	 the	son	and	 the	holy
ghost	 --	 this	 is	 the	 true	 trinity	 the	 physiological,	 the	 psychological	 and	 the
emotional
if	 we	 can	 be	 aware	 of	 these	 three	 then	 exactly	 at	 the	 centre	 of	 these	 three
dimensions	the	fourth	happens
in	the	east	we	have	simply	called	it	the	fourth	turiya
we	have	given	it	a	number	not	a	name	the	fourth	is	awareness
and	it	brings	you	to	the	door	of	the	divine	this	is	one	of	my	emphases	i	want	to
emphasise
that	there	is	no	god	as	a	person	in	existence	the	very	idea	of	god	as	a	person	is	a
hangover	from	the	past	It	IS	me	language	of	the	child	god	the	father	--	it	shows
more	 about	 the	 people	 who	 were	 thinking	 of	 god	 as	 father	 than	 about	 the
existence	 of	 god	 himself	 those	 were	 the	 childhood	 days	 of	 humanity	 and	 of
course	a	child	cannot	think	of	more	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
than	a	big	father	who	is	protecting	who	will	always	be	there	to	look	after	us	we
can	 pray	 to	 him,	 we	 can	 depend	 on	 him	 it	 shows	 the	 fear	 of	 the	 child	 the
insecurity	of	 the	child	 the	helplessness	of	 the	child	 it	shows	nothing	about	god
but	the	very	idea	of	god	as	a	person	has	proved	very	dangerous
because	it	is	very	easy	to	argue	against	it	it	is	easy	to	argue	against	it	because	the
whole	 idea	 is	 false	 it	 can	 be	 destroyed	 through	 simple	 logic	 so	 the	 religious
people	are	the	cause	of	creating	atheism	in	the	world	i	don't	 think	that	atheism
would	ever	have	been	possible	 if	 the	idea	of	god	as	a	person	was	not	accepted
the	moment	you	drop	the	idea	of	god	as	a	person	then	even	friedrich	nietzsche
cannot	say	god	is	dead	he	can	say	god	is	dead
because	the	presupposition	is	there	that	god	is	a	person	to	me	god	is	a	presence
not	 a	 person	 it	 is	 an	 experience	 --	 it	 is	 not	 something	 outside	 you	you	 cannot
pray	to	god,	there	is	no	one	to	pray	to	and	it	is	time	that	man
should	become	a	little	more	mature	kneeling	down,	raising	your	hands	and	head
towards	the	sky	is	simply	silly	in	fact	the	best	way	to	find	godliness	is	close	your
eyes	and	look	within	not	towards	the	sky
there	are	other	people	who	are	meant	to	do	that	the	astronomers,	the	astrologers,
the	physicists	let	them	look	at	the	stars,	that	is	their	work	the	religious	person	s
basic	standpoint	is	that	of	turning	in
looking	 at	 the	 sky	 is	 not	 going	 to	help	 look	within,	 search	within	 the	moment
you	come	closer	 to	your	own	centre	of	 consciousness	you	will	be	 surprised:	 a
tremendous	presence	a	presence	of	an	eternal	light	a	presence	of	eternal	ecstasy
to	me	that	is	godliness
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
once	you	have	discovered	it	in	your	own	being	you	know	that	it	is	in	every	being
--
not	only	human	beings
but	 animals,	 birds,	 trees,	mountains	 everything	 is	 full	 of	 godliness	 because	 in
fact	the	whole	existence	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	godliness	there	is	no	matter
and	no	consciousness	it	is	all	one	energy
different	concentrations	of	the	same	energy	different	manifestations	of	the	same
energy	but	first	one	has	to	find	it	within	oneself	then	it	is	found	everywhere	and
the	moment	you	see	that	you	are	living	in	the	ocean	of	godliness
you	have	come	home
now	there	is	nothing	else	to	search	for	nothing	else	to	ask	for...
a	tremendous	contentment,	an	ultimate	fulfilment	the	most	divine	experience	in
life	is	the	experience	of	absolute	silence	as	if	the	whole	world	has	stopped	--
and	it	can	be	experienced
we	have	a	space	within	ourselves	if	we	stand	in	that	space
the	 whole	 world	 simply	 disappears	 and	 a	 profound	 silence	 surrounds	 you	 a
virgin	silence
in	that	silence	only	one	hears	the	celestial	music	the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
in	that	silence	only
life	becomes	a	song,	a	celebration	once	experienced	it	is	never	lost	and	it	is	one
of	the	most	ridiculous	things	about	human	beings
that	 they	 are	 carrying	 it	 within	 themselves	 and	 are	 not	 aware	 of	 it	 at	 all	 the
inexhaustible	treasure	is	there	just	waiting	for	you
but	 we	 are	 keeping	 our	 back	 towards	 it	 we	 are	 running	 everywhere,	 in	 every
direction	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
we	are	trying	to	reach	to	the	everest	trying	to	reach	to	the	moon,	to	mars	just	the
whole	stupidity	of	human	mind	it	 is	ready	to	go	anywhere	except	to	one's	own
centre	sannyas	means	getting	out	of	this	stupidity	the	first	responsibility	of	any
intelligent	person	is	to	know	oneself
because	 by	 knowing	 it	 all	 is	 known	 by	 knowing	 it	 life	 is	 transformed	 from
misery	to	bliss,	from	darkness	to	light	from	death	into	immortality	love	can	exist
in	three	dimensions	it	can	be	either	animal	or	human	or	divine	the	animal	love	is
part	of	our	biology	it	is	just	sex
the	human	love	has	to	be	achieved	it	is	not	already	there;	it	has	to	be	created	the
biology	is	a	given	factor	but	the	psychology	is	our	creativity	the	ingredients	are
there
the	canvas	is	there,	the	colour	tubes	are	there	the	brush	is	there	but	the	painting
is	not	there	and	it	will	depend	on	you	what	kind	of	painting	is	going	to	happen
you	can	make	a	painting
which	is	nothing	but	a	nightmare	a	picasso	painting
or	you	can	make	something
which	has	 tremendous	 beauty	 not	 like	 a	 nightmare	 but	 like	 a	 sweet	 dream	 the
same	colours,	the	same	canvas,	the	same	hands	but	one	has	to	be	more	sensitive
more	aesthetically	aware
to	create	something	of	real	beauty	so	love	depends	on	you
sex	is	independent	of	you
it	is	part	of	your	biology,	it	is	nature	s	way	to	reproduce	itself	--	it	has	nothing	to
do	 with	 you	 it	 is	 almost	 a	 mechanical	 phenomenon	 chemical,	 physiological,
hormonal	but	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	consciousness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
love	is	a	creativity
and	very	few	people	create	it	they	remain	confined	to	the	animal	cage	they	are
not	even	aware
that	something	higher	is	possible	of	course	it	is	the	same	energy	that	is	involved
in	 sex	which	 becomes	 love	 but	 you	 have	 to	 create	 the	 situation	 in	 which	 the
energy	can	start	moving	into	new	directions
which	are	not	provided	by	biology	and	beyond	human	love	is	divine	love	which
is	 the	 ultimate	 in	 creation	 human	 love	 is	 far	 superior	 to	 animal	 love	 but
something	of	the	animal	remains	like	a	hangover
it	has	grown	out	of	the	biological	but	it	carries	something	of	the	biology	in	it	it	is
not	absolutely	free	from	sex	sex	is	now	secondary	but	it	 is	there	in	divine	love
sex	 is	 totally	 transformed	 it	 evaporates,	 the	 animal	 evaporates	 not	 only	 the
animal	but	the	human	also	evaporates	divine	love	is	the	sheer	joy	of	sharing	your
being,	your	creativity,	your	song	whatsoever	you	can	share
and	 it	 is	 a	 sharing	 with	 the	 whole	 existence	 human	 love	 is	 person-to-person
animal	love	is	impersonal
psychologists	and	biologists	feel	that	human	love	became	possible	because	it	is
only	 human	 beings	 who	make	 love	 facing	 each	 other	 because	 they	 face	 each
other	they	look	into	each	other's	eyes	and	in	those	moments	of	love	certain	kind
of	relationship	grows	between	persons
animals	don't	make	love	facing	each	other	hence	they	don't	know	the	other	at	all
the	other	simply	remains	anonymous	there	is	no	relationship
that	 grows	 out	 of	 their	 love	 making	 animal	 love	 is	 impersonal,	 below	 the
personal	human	love	is	personal,	person-to-person	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
divine	love	is	again	impersonal	but	beyond	the	personal,	not	below	the	personal
it	is	the	love	of	the	person	for	the	impersonal	existence,	for	the	whole	the	love	of
the	wave	for	 the	ocean	and	of	course,	 the	bigger,	 the	vaster	your	love	is	vaster
ecstasies	become	possible	 through	 it	 animal	 love	doesn't	 seem	 to	be	ecstatic	 if
you	have	seen	two	animals	making	love	you	can	watch	it	--	on	their	faces	there
is	no	ecstasy	instead	there	is	a	kind	of	agony	because	they	are	being	forced	by
some	natural	energy
of	which	they	are	just	prisoners	as	if	they	have	to	do	it
they	go	on	their	way
the	moment	they	are	finished	you	can	watch	their	faces
there	is	no	ecstasy,	no	gratitude,	no	thankfulness	not	even	a	smile
many	human	beings	also	do	that	that	means	they	are	still	behaving	like	animals
but	human	love	has	a	certain	joy	in	it	a	certain	ecstasy	in	it
but	only	to	a	certain	extent	and	because	it	is	limited	to	a	person	sooner	or	later
one	gets	bored	sooner	or	later	it	becomes	a	duty	to	be	fulfilled	all	joy	disappears
from	 it,	 it	 becomes	 routine	 divine	 love	 is	 for	 the	 whole	 and	 the	 whole	 is
immense,	infinite	hence	one	is	never	bored
it	has	no	boundaries
one	is	never	tired
a	 man	 like	 buddha,	 jesus	 or	 zarathustra	 live	 twenty-four	 hours	 a	 day	 in	 an
orgasmic	state	that	orgasmic	state	is	almost	like	breathing	or	the	heartbeat
that's	 the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas	to	be	in	 love	with	the	whole	to	me	it	 is	real
prayer
and	all	 that	goes	on	in	the	name	of	prayer	in	the	churches	and	the	temples	and
mosques	is	just	false,	pseudo
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	only	way	to	experience	the	truth	of	existence	is	to	drop	the	ego
it	is	the	ego	that	keeps	us	separate	it	is	the	ego	that	functions	as	a	barrier,	a	wall
the	moment	you	drop	the	ego	--	and	we	can	drop	it	because	it	is	not	something
that	 is	 part	 of	 our	 being	 it	 is	 something	 that	we	have	 accumulated	 around	our
being,	it	is	our	possession	we	can	renounce	it
it	is	not	clinging	to	us,	we	are	clinging	to	it	any	moment	we	stop	clinging	it	falls
the	moment	ego	disappears
you	become	 just	 a	 shadow	of	god	 then	you	are	 just	 a	nobody	 then	you	are	no
more
a	nothingness
and	nothingness	has	tremendous	purity	the	moment	one	is	nobody
one	has	reached	to	the	ultimate	depth	of	being	because	that	depth	is	anonymous
it	has	no	name,	no	form
there	is	no	sense	of	i	in	it	it	is	simply	amness,	pure	existence	then	one	functions
as	a	shadow	of	god	then	one	becomes	just	a	hollow	bamboo	if	god	wants	to	sing
a	 song	 the	 hollow	bamboo	 functions	 as	 a	 flute	 if	 god	does	 not	want	 to	 sing	 a
song	the	hollow	bamboo	rests	in	silence	song	or	silence	but	it	is	of	god	and	by
god	 i	mean	 the	whole,	 the	 total,	 the	cosmos	a	 sannyasin	has	 to	 learn	only	one
thing	how	not	to	be,	how	to	disappear	as	an	ego	and	remember,	it	is	not	a	loss	it
is	the	ultimate	gain
by	losing	the	ego	you	lose	nothing	and	you	gain	all
life	is	full	of	miracles
every	moment
on	every	step	you	encounter	miracles	but	we	are	blind,	we	have	lost	the	sense	of
wonder	we	have	forgotten	the	art	of	feeling	awe	and	that	is	the	greatest	religious
quality	the	sense	of	feeling	wonder	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
there	 are	 people	 who	 will	 go	 on	 their	 whole	 life	 and	 will	 never	 look	 at	 the
beautiful	sky	or	at	the	trees	or	at	a	sunset	these	people	are	blind
there	are	people	who	will	never	listen	to	the	sound	of	running	water	or	the	wind
passing	through	the	pines	or	just	the	wind
playing	 in	 the	 fall	with	dry	 leaves	and	 the	great	music	 that	 it	 creates	 there	are
people	who	 never	 look	 at	 the	 flowers	 never	 look	 at	 each	 other's	 eyes	 at	 each
other's	faces
there	are	people	whose	hands	are	dead	they	cannot	feel	when	they	touch	a	tree
they	cannot	feel	the	juice	that	is	running	in	it	 the	life	that	is	flowing	through	it
these	are	the	really	crippled	people,	really	blind,	deaf	they	are	somehow	living	at
the	 minimum	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 live	 at	 the	 maximum	 he	 has	 to	 live	 at	 one
hundred	degrees	intensely,	passionately
each	moment	involved	--	so	utterly	that	nothing	is	left	behind	as	if	this	moment
is	going	to	be	the	last	and	who	knows?	--	it	may	be	the	last	one	day	one	moment
is	going	to	be	the	last	 live	each	moment	as	 if	 this	 is	 the	last	moment	put	all	at
stake,	 risk	 all	 and	 you	 will	 be	 immensely	 surprised	 that	 life	 becomes	 a
tremendous	miracle	 everything	 starts	 vibrating	with	 life	 everything	 becomes	 a
message	 every	 flower	 becomes	 a	 bible	 or	 a	 koran	 or	 a	 gita	 and	 every	 star
becomes	a	proof	enough	proof	that	 life	is	not	 just	material	every	experience	of
beauty	 proves	 that	 life	 is	 more	 than	 matter	 every	 time	 you	 say	 aha!	 you	 are
saying	 a	 prayer	 my	 message	 is	 simple:	 live	 life	 as	 a	 miracle	 because	 it	 is	 a
miracle
experience	 it	 as	magical	 --	 it	 is	magical	 there	 cannot	 be	 a	more	 beautiful	 life
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	a	more	beautiful	existence	religions	in	the	past	have	taken	life	very	seriously
because	 of	 this	 attitude	 towards	 life	 they	 prevented	 millions	 of	 people	 from
being	religious
not	only	that	--	they	created	a	situation	in	which	only	the	pathological,	the	ill,	the
sick	 will	 be	 attracted	 towards	 religion	 the	 intelligent,	 the	 healthy,	 the	 young
those	who	are	 full	 of	 life	will	 be	 repulsed	by	 religion	 seriousness	 is	 a	 kind	of
disease	playfulness	should	be	the	foundation	of	a	true	religion
so	i	teach	be	playful:
the	more	playful	you	are
the	closer	you	are	to	existence	the	more	serious	you	are
the	more	egoist	you	become	and	the	more	serious	you	are	the	more	closed	then
you	are	not	open	to	the	wind	to	the	sun,	to	the	rain
you	 are	 not	 open	 to	 anything	 you	 are	 just	 closed	within	 your	 so-called	 stupid
theology,	certain	dogma,	doctrine,	certain	cult	you	are	no	more	vulnerable	one
has	to	be	vulnerable
keep	all	the	windows	open
allow	existence	to	penetrate	you	and	don't	take	things	seriously	existence	is	not
serious
otherwise	there	would	not	be	flowers	existence	is	not	serious
otherwise	there	would	not	be	the	song	of	the	birds	existence	is	very	very	playful
joyous	youthful	alive
and	to	be	in	tune	with	it	you	have	to	be	the	same	so	become	a	song,	become	a
celebration	don't	miss	any	opportunity	to	celebrate	in	fact	don't	bother	whether	it
is	 the	 right	 moment	 to	 celebrate	 or	 not	 because	 that	 is	 seriousness	 use	 it	 as
celebration
don't	wait	till	the	right	occasion	comes	then	you	will	miss
use	any	occasion,	any	excuse	is	a	good	excuse	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
if	you	are	celebrating
when	i	was	a	child
my	 father	 made	 a	 beautiful	 house	 but	 he	 was	 a	 very	 simple	 man	 so	 the
contractors	--
and	you	know	indian	contractors	they	deceived	him	and	he	never	even	conceived
that	they	can	deceive;	they	were	also	his	friends	the	house	was	ready
we	were	just	going	to	move	within	eight	days	he	had	gone	out	for	some	business
and	the	house	collapsed
so	i	sent	him	a	telegram
386	 come	 back	 immediately,	 the	 house	 has	 collapsed	 but	 he	 didn't	 come,	 he
didn't	reply	either	he	came	when	he	was	expected	to	come	and	the	first	thing	he
said	to	me	was	there	was	no	need	to	waste	money	on	the	telegram	the	house	had
already	collapsed	you	should	have	celebrated	i	said	for	what?
he	 said	 because	 if	we	 had	moved	 in	 and	 then	 the	 house	 had	 collapsed	we	 all
would	have	been	killed	this	is	enough	excuse	for	celebration	he	gave	a	feast	for
the	whole	town	nobody	could	believe,	he	is	mad	but	i	could	see	his	point,	he	was
right	 never	 miss	 an	 opportunity	 for	 celebrating	 for	 feasting,	 for	 singing,	 for
dancing	and	then	don't	bother	about	religions	you	are	religious
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#16
Chapter	title:	None
16	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103165
ShortTitle:	CLAPP16
Audio:
No
Video:
No
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
love	needs	great	courage
for	the	simple	reason	that	the	basic	requirement	of	love	is	to	drop	the	ego
and	 man	 is	 very	 afraid	 of	 dropping	 the	 ego	 it	 seems	 almost	 like	 committing
suicide	it	only	seems	so	because	we	don't	know	anything	other	than	the	ego	ego
has	 become	our	 only	 identity	 and	 to	 drop	 it	 certainly	means	 you	 are	 dropping
your	individuality	it	is	not	true
in	fact	just	the	opposite	is	the	truth	unless	you	drop	the	ego
you	cannot	know	your	real	individuality	the	ego	is	a	pretender
something	false,	pseudo,	invented	the	moment	it	is	dropped
only	then	you	can	see	the	real	otherwise	the	unreal	hides	the	real	the	unreal	hides
the	real	like	clouds	hiding	the	sun	love	requires	a	dropping	of	the	ego	hence	love
can	become	the	door	to	the	divine	you	may	start	loving	a	person	but	you	will	end
up	loving	 the	 impersonal	 the	person	becomes	 just	 like	a	window	open	towards
the	 infinite	 sky	but	one	has	 to	be	absolutely	clear	 that	 the	ego	will	have	 to	be
sacrificed	people	hanker	for	love
but	at	the	same	time	they	cling	to	their	ego	hence	love	never	becomes	a	reality
they	come	and	go	without	 tasting	the	nectar	of	 love	and	unless	you	experience
love	you	have	not	experienced	life	at	all	you	miss	the	point
love	is	sacred
in	 fact	 the	 only	 thing	 that	 can	 give	 you	 the	 feeling	 of	 the	 sacred	 is	 love	 love
exists	on	the	earth	but	is	not	part	of	the	earth	it	is	a	ray	from	the	beyond	so	those
who	can	catch	hold	of	the	ray	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
they	 can	 go	 on	 moving	 in	 the	 direction	 from	 which	 the	 ray	 is	 coming	 and
ultimately	 can	 find	 the	 source	 of	 all	 love	 the	 religions	 have	 called	 that	 source
god	it	is	better	to	call	it	godliness	so	the	idea	of	the	person	is	dropped	and	only
the	idea	of	energy	remains	love	is	sacred,	divine,	godly	and	also,	love	is	a	noble
giver	one	can	give	but	 if	 there	 is	an	expectation	of	something	 to	gain	out	of	 it
then	it	is	not	noble,	then	it	is	just	pure	business	it	has	no	nobility	about	it	one	can
give	with	certain	conditions	then	it	loses	all	nobility	love	is	a	noble	giver
because	it	gives	for	the	sheer	joy	of	giving	there	is	no	desire	for	any	return	--
not	 that	 rewards	 don't	 come	 they	 come	 --	 they	 come	 thousandfold	 but	 that	 is
another	matter	that	is	not	your	expectation	you	were	not	desiring	it,	you	were	not
demanding	it	you	had	no	idea	of	any	return	 in	fact	 the	 lover	 is	surprised	when
the	gifts	come	what	he	had	given	was	nothing	and	what	comes	is	almost	infinite,
immeasurable	 love	 is	 sacred,	 it	 is	 really	 sacred	 because	 it	 is	 the	 art	 of	 noble
giving	 give	 for	 the	 sheer	 joy	 of	 giving	 share	 for	 sharing's	 sake,	 for	 no	 other
reason	 and	 you	 will	 be	 rewarded	 immeasurably	 you	 will	 come	 to	 the
inexhaustible	source	just	by	giving	you	will	become	every	time	more	and	more
rich	--	that's	the	economics	of	love	a	totally	different	economics	just	the	opposite
of	 the	 ordinary	 economics	 if	 you	 give	 you	 will	 become	 poor	 in	 the	 ordinary
economical	world	if	you	go	on	giving	soon	you	will	be	a	beggar	but	in	the	inner
world	 the	 laws	 are	 just	 the	 reverse	 give	 and	 you	 become	 richer	 the	more	 you
give,	the	more	you	have	the	less	you	give,	the	less	you	have	if	you	don't	give	you
are	poor,	you	are	a	beggar	one	has	to	learn	it	but	the	only	way	to	learn	is	to	give
and	see	what	happens	to	share	and	see	what	happens	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
there	 is	 no	 other	way	 to	 learn	 except	 experiencing	 it	 life	 has	 only	 one	 centre
which	is	eternal	otherwise	everything	goes	on	moving	and	changing	life	is	like	a
wheel
but	the	wheel	moves	on	something	unmoving	that	unmoving	centre	of	the	wheel
is	love	everything	changes
only	 love	 remains	 always	 the	 same	 love	 is	 the	 only	 phenomenon	 that	 remains
unaffected	by	time	that	is	beyond	time
those	who	have	known	love
they	have	known	that	time	is	not	all	that	there	is	something	more	than	time	the
eternity
time	moves	from	past	to	future	present	in	fact	does	not	exist	 in	time	ordinarily
we	think	these	are	the	three	tenses	of	time	past,	present,	future
but	 in	 fact	 time	consists	only	of	past	and	 future	you	can	never	get	hold	of	 the
present	the	moment	you	get	hold	of	it	it	is	already	past	or	if	you	try	to	get	hold	of
it	before	it	becomes	past
then	it	is	in	the	future
you	cannot	get	hold	of	it	in	the	present	and	love	is	in	the	present,	love	is	always
now	it	abides	here	and	now
it	has	no	past,	no	future,	no	birth,	no	death	it	simply	is,	it	is	pure	isness	and	the
whole	existence
is	 made	 of	 the	 stuff	 called	 love	 the	 deeper	 you	 go	 into	 it	 the	 more	 you	 are
surprised	that	existence	is	not	made	of	matter	matter	is	only	illusory
illusory	in	the	sense	that	it	appears	there	but	if	you	go	deeper	into	it	it	disappears
physicists	say	it	is	energy,	not	matter	that	is	their	way	of	saying	it	but	the	mystics
say	it	is	love,	not	matter	in	fact	both	have	come	very	close	the	physicists	and	the
mystics	because	love	is	pure	energy	of	course	the	mystics	way	of	saying	it	is	far
better,	far	more	poetic	than	the	physicists'	way	of	saying	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
energy	is	a	non-poetic	expression,	neutral	love	is	a	poetic	expression	it	brings	the
energy	closer	to	you	it	becomes	your	very	heart	the	moment	you	say	it	is	love	it
becomes	something	of	immense	value	to	know	the	mystery	of	existence	one	has
to	know	 the	mystery	of	 love	 to	know	 the	ultimate,	 the	eternal	one	has	 to	dive
deep	into	love	my	sannyasins	are	not	in	search	of	god	or	truth	their	whole	search
is	to	know	love	in	its	totality	because	knowing	love	in	its	totality	is	knowing	all
it	is	knowing	truth,	it	is	knowing	god	it	is	knowing	freedom
it	is	knowing	all	that	is	worth	knowing	one	has	to	surrender	to	love	with	totality
not	holding	anything	back
if	you	are	holding	something	back	you	will	not	be	able	 to	experience	 love	one
has	to	be	a	gambler,	not	calculating	but	ready	to	risk	all,	on	one	stake	everything
that	one	has	and	in	that	very	moment	is	the	transformation
there	is	a	a	great	misunderstanding	it	has	existed	in	the	whole	past	of	humanity
and	because	of	that	misunderstanding	lovers	have	been	quarrelling	fighting	with
each	other
they	think	they	have	to	surrender	to	each	other	that	is	nonsense
they	both	have	to	surrender	to	love	surrender	has	to	be	there,	but	it	is	not	to	each
other	 that	creates	 the	conflict;	 then	each	 tries	 the	other	should	surrender	 to	me
and	of	course,	the	same	is	the	desire	of	the	other	and	then	there	is	conflict,	then
there	is	quarrel	now	psychologists	say	lovers	are	intimate	enemies	and	they	are
right	--	it	should	not	be	so	because	enemies	are	after	all	enemies	intimate	or	not
intimate
in	fact	intimate	enemies	are	more	dangerous	because	they	are	so	close
and	if	lovers	are	also	intimate	enemies	then	there	are	only	two	categories	in	the
world	the	unintimate	enemies
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	the	intimate	enemies
friendship	disappears	completely	then	there	is	no	third	category	and	the	reason	is
a	 fallacy	once	 it	 is	understood	 that	both	have	 to	 surrender	 to	 love,	not	 to	each
other	things	become	very	easy
then	there	is	no	question	of	possessing	each	other	no	question	of	domination
both	 are	possessed	by	 love	 love	which	 is	 a	 totally	different	phenomenon	 from
their	 egos,	 their	personalities	 they	melt	 into	 love	not	 into	each	other	of	 course
indirectly	they	melt	into	each	other	also	because	they	are	melting	into	the	same
love	but	that	is	indirect,	that	happens	automatically	love	is	the	first	experience	of
melting,	 merging,	 of	 losing	 one's	 boundaries	 hence	 it	 is	 the	 first	 spiritual
experience	and	one	should	not	stop	at	that	one	should	go	on	and	on
finding	more,	deeper	surrenders	and	one	day	one	has	to	be	ready	to	surrender	all
to	 the	whole	 that	 is	 the	ultimate	goal	of	human	consciousness	 the	moment	one
surrenders	oneself	to	the	whole	one	becomes	holy
to	me	there	is	no	other	kind	of	holiness	that	is	the	only	possibility	of	becoming	a
seer,	 a	 sage,	 a	 saint	 all	 other	 saints	 are	 just	 hocus-pocus	 deep	 down	 in	 their
minds	 there	 are	 motives,	 desires	 maybe	 of	 the	 other	 world,	 of	 heaven,	 of
paradise	of	being	with	god	and	all	that	kind	of	nonsense	the	real	seeker	simply
surrenders	 to	 the	 universe	 dissolves	 himself	 into	 the	whole,	 disappears	 and	 in
that	very	disappearance	one	finds	the	ultimate	core	of	one's	being	the	deathless,
the	immortal,	the	eternal	let	love	be	your	meditation	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
let	love	be	your	only	law
i	 have	 only	 one	 commandment	 because	 to	 me	 the	 whole	 religiousness	 is
contained	in	this	single	word	love
all	 the	bibles,	all	 the	gitas,	all	 the	korans	 if	 in	any	scripture	 there	 is	something
valuable	then	it	is	bound	to	be	some	aspect	of	love	love	has	many	aspects
it	is	a	multi-dimensional	phenomenon	the	way	to	find	it	is	meditation	meditation
simply	 means	 becoming	 utterly	 silent	 so	 that	 your	 mind	 is	 no	 more	 an
interference	mind	is	full	of	desires,	motives,	goals,	purposes	and	love	cannot	be
found	by	the	mind	because	love	has	no	motive,	no	purpose	love	has	nothing	to
achieve,	nothing	to	gain	it	is	not	a	means	to	some	end	it	is	an	end	unto	itself
hence	mind	is	incapable	of	even	comprehending	what	love	is
mind	has	to	be	put	aside
that	putting	aside	of	 the	mind	is	what	meditation	is	all	about	when	the	mind	is
put	aside	you	are	in	a	state	of	meditation	no-mind	is	meditation
and	in	that	state,	love	blossoms	suddenly	you	explode	into	love	your	whole	life
becomes	 an	 overflowing	 love	 but	without	 silence	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 one	 has	 to
attain	to	such	a	deep	silence	that	not	even	a	slight	tremor	of	the	mind	remains	in
it	 not	 even	 a	 small	 ripple	 of	 thought,	 desire	motive,	 greed,	 anger,	 no	 past,	 no
future	when	mind	has	completely	ceased	then	one	hears	the	music	of	silence	the
song	of	silence
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Capping
and	 that	 is	 the	 moment	 when	 love	 explodes	 then	 your	 whole	 life	 becomes
nothing	but	love	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
only	 the	 loving	heart	knows	what	peace	 is	 the	unloving	heart	knows	only	war
sometimes	 hot,	 sometimes	 cold	 but	 it	 is	 war	 all	 the	 same	 the	 unloving	 heart
means	a	heart	 full	of	hatred	and	people	are	 living	 in	 that	ugly	 space	of	course
they	find	beautiful	rationalisations	for	their	head	trip
in	 fact	 they	 even	 pretend	 to	 love	 just	 to	 hate	 for	 example	 they	 will	 love
christianity	just	to	hate	islam
they	will	 love	 islam	 just	 to	hate	hinduism	 they	will	 love	hinduism	 just	 to	hate
buddhism	they	will	love	buddhism	just	to	hate	communism	and	so	on,	so	forth
if	 you	 look	deep	 inside	 their	 being	 their	 love	 is	 nothing	but	 an	 excuse	 to	hate
they	will	 love	their	country	to	hate	all	other	countries	they	will	 love	their	race,
their	colour	to	hate	all	other	races	and	all	other	colours	but	their	basic	motive	is
hatred	 hence	 in	 the	 name	 of	 religion	 so	 much	 bloodshed	 has	 happened	 even
christians	who	believe	in	jesus	whose	whole	teaching	is	rooted	in	love	they	have
killed	thousands	of	people	they	have	burned	people	alive	in	the	name	of	jesus,	in
the	name	of	love	it	is	a	very	insane	humanity	we	talk	about	love	just	to	hide	our
hatred	we	 smile	 just	 to	 hide	 our	 anger	 a	 sannyasin	 has	 to	 be	 absolutely	 clear
about	it	one	has	to	be	absolutely	naked	before	oneself	no	more	rationalisation
because	that	is	the	only	way	to	be	finished	with	hatred	if	you	can	see	it	is	hatred
that	very	seeing	is	enough	then	you	cannot	live	it,	then	you	have	to	drop	it	but	if
you	think	it	 is	 love	then	on	the	package	it	 is	 love	wrapped	in	beautiful	packets
but	 inside	 it	 is	 nothing	 but	 hatred	 so	 you	 can	 go	 on	 carrying	 those	 packets
thinking	that	it	is	love
a	sannyasin	has	to	expose	himself	totally	before	himself	he	has	to	be	clear	what
exactly	is	in	his	heart	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	moment	you	see	hatred
that	 is	 the	death	of	hatred	because	nobody	can	allow	 it	nobody	 is	 so	 stupid	 to
allow	it	if	one	knows,	if	one	knows	exactly	the	ugliness	of	it	and	it	is	ugly,	hence
i	 say	 the	 very	 seeing	 of	 it	 becomes	 its	 dropping	 and	 the	moment	 hatred	 is	 no
more	 there	 love	 blossoms	 and	 with	 love	 comes	 peace	 peace	 with	 the	 whole
existence,	a	deep	harmony	then	there	is	no	enemy
jesus	 says	 love	 thy	 enemies	 --	 i	 don't	 agree	 because	 even	 to	 think	 of	 them	 as
enemies	is	not	right
once	you	think	of	them	as	enemies	and	then	you	try	to	love	them	you	are	getting
into	a	contradiction	you	can	at	 the	most	pretend	because	deep	down	you	know
they	are	enemies	and	through	your	pretension	that	you	are	loving	your	enemies
you	can	get	into	an	ego	trip	that	you	are	a	holy	person,	holier-than-thou	look,	i
love	even	my	enemies	not	only	that,	even	my	neighbours	i	love	my	neighbours
to	me	the	man	of	love	knows	no	enemy	hence	he	loves	all
not	that	he	loves	his	enemies	he	simply	cannot	see
that	there	is	anybody	who	is	his	enemy	jesus	on	the	cross	says
father,	forgive	these	people	because	they	know	not	what	they	are	doing	it	looks
like	 a	 good	 gesture	 but	 in	 fact	 he	 is	 condemning	 them,	 he	 is	 saying	 they	 are
fools,	they	don't	know	what	they	are	doing	they	are	doing	wrong	--	that	much	is
certain	otherwise	why	forgive	them?
the	 very	 idea	 forgive	 them	 shows	 that	 jesus	 knows	 they	 are	 doing	wrong	 but
according	 to	 his	 whole	 teaching	 love	 thy	 enemies	 as	 thyself	 he	 is	 acting	 his
whole	philosophy	at	the	last	moment	also	he	says	forgive	i	will	not	agree	to	it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
because	you	have	already	condemned	 them	 they	are	doing	 their	 thing	and	you
are	doing	your	thing	what	is	there	to	be	forgiven?
neither	they	need	to	be	forgiven	nor	you	need	to	be	forgiven	you	enjoyed	doing
your	thing	they	are	enjoying	doing	their	thing	if	i	am	crucified	i	will	know	that
this	is	what	i	have	been	doing	i	was	driving	those	people	to	crucify	me	so	what	is
there	to	ask	god	to	forgive	them	for?
why	this	holier-than-thou	attitude?
this	is	a	great	insult	to	the	people	i	will	simply	thank	them
you	have	done	the	thing
that	i	was	hoping	you	would	do	so	goodbye,	see	you	again
and	again	i	will	do	the	same	and	i	hope	that	you	will	also	do	the	same	what	else
is	there	to	say?
love	cannot	even	utter	 these	words,	 forgive	 them	love	simply	 loves	and	knows
peace	peace	with	the	whole	existence	love	can	either	be	hot	or	cold	or	cool	the
cool	 love	 is	 a	 rare	 phenomenon	 the	 other	 two	 are	well	 known	 the	 hot	 love	 is
nothing	 but	 pure	 sexuality	 and	 the	 cold	 love	 is	 nothing	 but	 what	 happens
between	a	wife	and	a	husband	--
it	is	a	pretension,	it	is	hypocrisy	it	is	a	mannerism,	etiquette	love	is	dead	when	it
is	cold	it	is	the	coldness	of	a	corpse	you	still	call	the	corpse	by	the	same	name	as
when	the	person	was	alive	hence	it	is	called	cold	love	but	love	is	no	more	there	it
is	just	a	corpse
and	you	have	to	perfume	it	so	it	does	not	start	stinking	that's	what	husbands	and
wives	continuously	do	perfuming,	managing	 somehow	 the	pretension	knowing
perfectly	well	that	all	has	disappeared	but	not	courageous	enough	to	say	so	there
are	so	many	involvements,	investments	children,	business,	money
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	a	thousand	and	one	things	respectability,	society
and	one	has	to	think	of	all	these	things	then	it	is	cold	love
both	are	known,	both	are	known	because	each	hot	love	ends	in	cold	love	because
how	long	can	you	keep	anything	hot?
sooner	or	later	it	starts	getting	cold	the	honeymoon	is	enough
the	moment	the	honeymoon	is	over	the	heat	is	gone	now	it	is	a	cold	thing
you	 can	 carry	 it	 your	 whole	 life	 cool	 love	 is	 a	 very	 rare	 phenomenon	 --	 it
happens	 only	 when	 there	 is	 deep	 meditation	 behind	 it	 meditation	 makes
everything	cool	and	the	miracle	of	coolness	is	it	is	neither	hot	nor	cold	it	is	not	a
passion,	lust,	hence	it	is	not	hot	and	because	it	is	never	hot	it	never	becomes	cold
it	simply	remains	exactly	in	the	middle	but	to	attain	to	cool	love	one	needs	the
basis	of	a	deep,	meditative	silence	i	am	teaching	my	people	to	give	roots	to	their
love	into	the	soil	of	meditation	then	you	will	have	cool	flowers	and	those	cool
flowers	are	eternal	they	never	die
because	they	are	no	more	part	of	time	to	know	the	dimension	of	cool	love	is	to
have	found	the	real	home	the	real	shelter,	the	real	security	love	never	grows	old
if	 it	 grows	 old	 it	 is	 not	 love	 it	 is	 something	 else	 pretending	 to	 be	 love	 love
always	remains	young
it	is	never	childish	either	if	it	is	childish	it	is	something	else	it	is	not	love
so	remember,	neither	childish	nor	senile	it	is	always	young
youthfulness	 is	 its	 very	 flavour	 and	 it	 is	 always	 new,	 each	moment	 it	 has	 the
miracle	of	renewing	itself	rejuvenating	itself
the	body	becomes	old
but	the	heart	remains	always	young	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	people	are	not	aware	of	their	hearts	they	are	not	aware	of	anything	in	them
which	remains	always	fresh	it	has	to	be	searched	for
one	will	have	to	dig	into	one's	being	because	there	is	much	rubbish	accumulated
the	parents,	 the	teachers,	 the	priests	 the	politicians	--	all	kinds	of	stupid	people
go	on	stuffing	every	child	with	nonsense	and	by	the	time	the	child	is	capable	of
going	into	himself
a	 great	 mountain	 of	 junk	 prevents	 him	 that	 junk	 has	 to	 be	 emptied	 out	 that's
exactly	the	whole	work	of	a	sannyasin	to	get	rid	of	the	junk
that	others	have	stuffed	you	with	to	clear	yourself	completely	to	clean	yourself
completely	 so	 that	 you	 can	 find	 your	 real	 being	 that	 you	 have	 brought	 with
yourself	 the	moment	 you	 find	 your	 real	 being	 you	 have	 found	 also	 love,	 also
truth,	also	freedom	and	that	experience	remains	fresh	and	to	live	in	that	freshness
is	bliss,	is	benediction	one	can	live	in	it,	one	can	die	in	it	it	continues	even	after
death	 one	 can	 enjoy	 life,	 one	 can	 enjoy	 death	 because	 now	 one	 is	 identified
neither	with	life	nor	with	death
one	 knows	 something	 in	 oneself	 which	 is	 beyond	 all	 duality	 that	 is	 your
freshness,	 your	 freedom	 love	 can	 be	 either	 addressed	 to	 someone	 or	 it	 can	 be
unaddressed
not	to	somebody	in	particular	when	love	is	addressed	to	somebody	it	is	narrow,
tunnel-like
and	a	 tunnel	 can	become	an	 imprisonment	 love	addressed	 to	 somebody	means
you	have	focussed
your	love	energy	on	a	single	point	and	you	have	excluded	the	whole	universe	out
of	 it	 just	 think	 that	 if	 love	 can	 give	 you	 so	much	 joy	 in	 such	 a	 narrow,	 one-
pointed	way	how	much	bliss	is	possible	if	love	can	be	unaddressed	not	pointing
in	any	direction	but	radiating	into	all	directions	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 anuragini	 love	 radiating	 into	 all	 directions	 not	 love	 to
somebody	 in	 particular	 but	 just	 a	 quality	 inside	 you	 the	 quality	 of	 being	 love
itself,	the	quality	of	loving	so	if	you	touch	a	rock	there	is	love	you	see	a	flower
and	there	is	love	even	when	you	are	sitting	all	alone	love	is	radiating
just	as	a	lamp	is	burning	in	a	room,	all	alone	but	still,	the	light	is	radiating	this	is
the	ultimate	goal	of	love	and	the	moment	one	can	allow	oneself	so	much	love-
full-ness
one	 knows	 the	 greatest	 ecstasy	 possible	 there	 is	 nothing	 beyond	 it	 there	 is
nothing	more	to	life	being	love	means
the	 mystery	 of	 existence	 has	 been	 contacted	 you	 have	 become	 part	 of	 the
miraculous	 the	 mysterious,	 the	 unknowable	 and	 to	 become	 part	 of	 it	 is	 the
ecstasy	without	it	one	lives	in	misery	in	a	dark	night	of	the	soul	love	brings	light,
love	brings	life	and	not	ordinary	live
but	eternal	life,	abundant	life	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#17
Chapter	title:	None
17	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103175
ShortTitle:	CLAPP17
Audio:
No
Video:
No
one	thing	very	significant	to	be	remembered	is	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	contentment	does	not	mean	satisfaction	satisfaction	 is	pseudo	contentment
deep	down	 there	 is	discontentment	 satisfaction	 is	only	a	cover-up,	 it	 is	a	mind
trick	otherwise	life	would	become	impossible	if	the	wound	of	discontentment	is
continuously	there
one	cannot	live
so	humanity	has	created	a	cover-up	for	it	that	is	satisfaction
it	is	a	very	thin	layer	hence	scratch	a	little	bit	and	the	discontent	starts	oozing	out
like	 pus	 contentment	 is	 a	 totally	 different	 phenomenon	 it	 is	 the	 healing	 of	 the
wound	contentment	comes
through	 understanding	 the	 nature	 of	 desire	 the	 nature	 of	 desire	 is	 unfulfillable
there	is	no	way	to	fulfil	it	whatsoever	you	do,	the	distance	between	you	and	your
desire	will	remain	the	same	the	desire	is	just	like	the	horizon	it	looks	just	a	few
miles	ahead	one	feels	that	one	can	reach	it,	it	is	not	so	far	away	but	as	you	move
towards	 it,	 it	 goes	 on	moving	 away	 the	 distance	 remains	 constantly	 the	 same
because	the	horizon	in	fact	does	not	exist	there	is	no	place	where	the	earth	and
the	sky	meet	it	 is	an	optical	illusion	--	so	is	desire	if	you	desire	something	and
you	feel	the	moment	you	attain	it	there	will	be	joy	you	can	go	on	hoping	till	you
attain	it	the	moment	you	attain	it	you	will	see	there	is	no	joy	in	it
the	desire	and	the	hope	has	moved	again	farther	away
the	same	illusion,	the	same	hope	and	one	goes	on	living	one's	whole	life	running
after	shadows
to	 understand	 the	 nature	 of	 desire	 that	 it	 is	 basically	 unfulfillable	 is	 the
foundation	 of	 contentment	 the	moment	 you	 see	 that	 the	 desire	 is	 unfulfillable
desiring	as	such	disappears	and	when	there	is	no	desire	in	the	heart	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
then	one	is	contented
and	certainly	contentment	is	the	greatest	song	there	cannot	be	any	song	superior
to	contentment	of	course	it	is	not	a	song	which	can	be	expressed	through	words
it	is	a	song	that	is	only	felt	it	is	just	like	the	heartbeat:	one	feels	it	it	is	so	deep
that	 it	 is	beyond	words,	 immeasurable	but	 it	 certainly	 is	a	 song,	 it	has	 its	own
music	but	totally	different	from	all	the	music	that	you	have	heard	before	we	have
a	special	word	for	it	in	the	east	we	call	it	anahat	nad
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
you	 cannot	make	 a	 sound	 by	 one	 hand	 clapping	 but	 that's	 actually	 what	 it	 is
because	 there	 is	 no	 other,	 only	 you	 are	 there	 when	 all	 the	 desires	 have
disappeared	 all	 others	 have	 also	 disappeared	 the	 others	were	 nothing	 but	 your
objects	of	desire	when	the	desire	is	no	more	the	others	are	no	more	the	moment
desire	 disappears	 the	 whole	 world	 disappears	 then	 there	 is	 absolute	 silence,
absolute	aloneness	but	 it	 Is	not	 loneliness	 --	you	are	with	yourself	you	are	not
lonely
in	fact	for	the	first	time	you	enjoy	your	very	being	it	is	silence	but	not	the	silence
of	a	cemetery	it	is	very	alive,	it	is	full	of	joy	it	is	the	silence	of	the	opening	of	a
flower	 there	 is	 fragrance	 in	 it,	 life	 in	 it,	 colour	 in	 it	 it	 is	 a	 dance,	 it	 is	 a
celebration	 the	 only	 glory	 possible	 in	 life	 is	 that	 of	 absolute	 contentment	 to
desire	is	to	remain	a	beggar	even	though	one	may	be	an	emperor	but	because	he
desires	he	 remains	 a	 beggar	 there	 is	 a	 famous	 story	of	 a	 sufi	mystic,	 farid	 the
great	moghul	emperor,	akbar	used	to	come	to	visit	him
he	lived	in	a	small	village	near	delhi	the	people	of	the	village	once	asked	farid
the	emperor	comes	to	see	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	we	don't	even	have
a	small	school	for	our	children	in	the	village	you	can	just	mention	it	and	we	can
have	the	school	do	us	a	favour,	you	can	tell	the	emperor	it	is	impossible	that	he
will	not	fulfil	what	you	ask	for	farid	said	i	will	do	it	but	because	i	have	to	ask
then	i	will	have	to	go	to	the	emperor	he	went	to	see	the	emperor	one	day	in	the
early	morning	 he	 was	 immediately	 received,	 welcomed,	 taken	 in	 the	 emperor
was	 praying,	 his	morning	 prayer	mohammedans	 pray	 five	 times	 a	 day	 he	was
doing	 his	 first	 prayer,	 farid	 stood	 behind	 listened	 to	 what	 the	 emperor	 was
praying	when	he	had	 finished	 the	prayer	 the	emperor	 raised	his	hands	 towards
the	 sky	 and	 asked	 god,	 give	 me	 more	 power	 more	 wealth,	 greater	 kingdom
listening	to	this	farid	laughed,	turned	back	at	his	laughter,	his	turning	back,	the
emperor	looked	he	rushed	over,	fell	at	his	feet	and	said	why	have	you	come?
and	why	you	are	going	back	and	why	did	you	laugh?
farid	said,	i	used	to	think	that	you	are	an	emperor	but	you	are	not,	you	are	still	a
beggar	 and	 i	 am	 going	 back	 because	 i	 had	 come	 to	 ask	 for	 a	 school	 for	 my
village	children	but	to	ask	from	a	beggar	does	not	look	right	so	cannot	ask
because	to	make	a	school	in	the	village	you	will	become	a	little	bit	poorer	you
are	already	poor
and	moreover	if	i	have	to	ask	then	why	should	i	ask	you
i	can	ask	god	himself
why	have	a	mediator	between?
desire	makes	everybody	a	beggar	hence	there	can	be	no	glory	when	one	is	full	of
desires	 the	 moment	 desires	 are	 dropped	 and	 the	 contentment	 settles	 in	 the
innermost	core	of	your	being	there	is	immense	glory
it	is	the	release	of	the	hidden	splendour	the	experience	of	contentment	is	the	only
real	spiritual	experience	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	contented	heart
is	 the	right	climate	for	meditation	to	grow	hence	meditation	cannot	be	a	desire
you	cannot	desire	it
when	all	 the	desires	are	dropped	only	then	meditation	can	start	growing	in	you
meditation	is	not	a	means	to	any	end	it	is	the	end	itself,	the	end	unto	itself	hence
the	people	who	try	to	meditate	for	some	purpose
are	missing	the	whole	point	of	it	meditation	is	non-purposive	even	to	desire	god
will	hinder	your	meditation	hence	the	religions
that	have	really	developed	meditation	have	dropped	the	idea	of	god	jainism	and
buddhism,	 two	 religions	 which	 have	 developed	 the	 art	 of	 meditation	 to	 its
ultimate	peak
both	 have	 dropped	 the	 idea	 of	 god	 not	 that	 god	 does	 not	 exist	 but	 they	 have
dropped	the	idea	for	the	simple	reason	that	if	god	is	talked	about	then	naturally
one	will	desire	to	attain	to	god's	experience	buddha	dropped	all	ideas
about	heaven,	paradise,	moksha	for	the	simple	reason	that	if	these	ideas	are	there
then	you	are	giving	objects	for	people's	desire	and	meditation	cannot	grow	in	the
climate	of	desiring	its	basic	requirement	is
that	there	should	be	no	desire	in	you	the	moment	there	is	no	desire	mind	can	be
easily	put	aside	because	mind	is	a	mechanism	to	fulfil	your	desires
when	 you	 don!t	want	 to	 go	 anywhere	 you	 can	 put	 your	 car	 aside,	 there	 is	 no
point	you	can	give	it	to	a	friend,	you	can	dispose	of	it	its	whole	function	is	if	you
want	to	go	somewhere	mind's	function	is	to	help	you	fulfil	your	desires	mind	is	a
mechanism,	a	device	so	that	you	can	attain
whatsoever	you	dream,	desire,	expect,	hope	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	meditation	is	a	state	of	no-mind	you	can	put	the	mind	aside	only	when	there
is	 nothing	 to	 be	 desired	 when	 you	 don't	 want	 to	 go	 anywhere	 when	 you	 are
utterly	happy,	now,	here	this	very	moment
then	 meditation	 grows	 spontaneously,	 effortlessly	 then	 your	 silence	 goes	 on
deepening	and	as	your	 silence	deepens	you	become	more	and	more	existential
less	 and	 less	 an	 individual,	 separate	 from	 existence	more	 and	more	 universal,
one	with	the	existence	and	that	oneness	is	really	what	religions	have	called	god	it
is	a	name	for	an	experience	god	is	not	a	person
but	the	ultimate	experience	of	oneness	with	the	whole
knowledge	is	not	wisdom
knowledge	is	acquired
so	that	you	can	fulfil	your	desires	lord	acton	is	right	when	he	says	knowledge	is
power
certainly	knowledge	gives	you	power	power	 to	attain	your	ambitions	power	 to
achieve	 your	 desires	 power	 to	 be	 somebody	 important	 but	 knowledge	 is	 all
borrowed	 from	 the	 schools	 to	 the	 universities	 what	 goes	 on	 happening	 in	 the
name	 of	 education	 is	 nothing	 but	 stuffing	 people's	 minds	 with	 borrowed
knowledge
the	whole	educational	system	exists	as	an	agent	of	the	past
in	the	service	of	the	vested	interests	so	that	you	can	become	useful	so	that	you
can	 be	 productive	 so	 that	 you	 can	 be	 reduced	 into	 a	 commodity	 society	 uses
knowledge	 to	 be	 powerful	 over	 you	 you	 use	 knowledge	 to	 be	 powerful	 over
others	wisdom	is	a	totally	different	dimension	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	power	it
has	nothing	to	do	with	achieving	any	ambition	wisdom	happens	only	when	one
has	dropped	the	whole	stupidity	of	ambitiousness	it	is	stupidity
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
because	 even	 if	 you	 become	 alexander	 the	 great	 so	 what?	 --	 he	 died	 in	 utter
frustration	 he	 conquered	 almost	 the	 whole	 world	 at	 least	 the	 world	 that	 was
known	 in	 his	 days	 and	 he	 was	 only	 thirty-three	 when	 he	 died	 he	 did	 a
tremendous	 job	of	 conquering	 the	world	he	 spent	 his	whole	 energy,	 his	whole
life	in	conquering	the	world
and	at	the	age	of	thirty-three	he	died	the	day	he	died	he	wanted	to	live	one	day
more	just	one	day	more	to	see	his	mother	because	that	was	the	distance	he	had	to
travel	twenty-four	hours	were	needed	for	him	to	reach	back	to	his	capital	he	was
going	 back	 from	 india	 and	 he	 had	 promised	 his	 mother	 that	 when	 he	 had
conquered	 the	 world	 he	 would	 come	 and	 offer	 the	 whole	 world	 to	 her	 only
twenty-four	hours	he	wanted	he	asked	his	physicians
they	 said	we	 cannot	 do	 anything	 you	 cannot	 live	more	 than	 a	 few	minutes	 he
said	 i	am	ready	 to	give	everything	you	can	 take	half	of	my	kingdom	they	said
even	if	you	give	your	whole	kingdom	we	cannot	save	you	--	it	is	impossible	at
that	moment
he	understood	the	futility	of	his	whole	effort	with	his	whole	kingdom
he	 could	 not	 even	 buy	 twenty-four	 hours	 he	 had	wasted	 thirty-three	 years	 for
conquering	something
which	was	not	even	capable	of	purchasing	 twenty-four	hours	 thirty-three	years
wasted,	his	life	spent	in	attaining	something
which	is	absolutely	meaningless	he	died	in	utter	frustration	all	ambitious	people
die	 in	 frustration	 they	 live	 in	 frustration,	 they	die	 in	 frustration	contentment	 is
simply	the	understanding	that	the	ambitious	attitude	towards	life	is	unintelligent
and	the	moment	you	see	 the	unintelligence	of	 it	desires	simply	evaporate	from
your	life	then	you	don't	want	to	be	somebody	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
then	you	are	perfectly	happy	in	being	nobody	and	in	that	state	wisdom	blossoms
wisdom	 does	 not	 come	 from	 the	 outside	 it	 is	 the	 explosion	 of	 your	 inner
consciousness	it	is	not	knowledge,	it	is	an	insight	into	the	innermost	mysteries	of
existence	 and	 that	 insight	 makes	 you	 immensely	 ecstatic	 because	 that	 insight
gives	 you	 an	 authentic	 glimpse	 of	 your	 own	 immortality	 you	 have	 been	 here
before	birth	and	you	will	be	here	after	death	birth	and	death	are	small	episodes	in
the	eternity	of	life
and	to	know	life	eternal
is	to	know	god,	another	name	for	god	it	is	possible	to	be	contented	right	now	it
need	not	wait	for	tomorrow	desire	has	to	wait	for	tomorrow	because	it	will	take
time	to	arrange,	manage,	reach	desire	needs	future
without	 future	desire	has	no	way	 to	exist	 in	 fact	 it	 is	desire	 that	 creates	 future
otherwise	there	is	no	future	time	consists	only	of	now	--	the	past	is	no	more	the
future	is	not	yet	--	they	are	both	non-existential	only	the	now	is	existential	then
what	is	past?
past	is	only	memory
and	what	is	future~
future	is	only	desire
they	are	dimensions	of	your	mind	not	dimensions	of	time
past	is	the	dust	that	the	mind	has	gathered	and	future	is	the	hopes,	the	desires,	the
ambitions	that	the	mind	wants	to	reach	some	goals	contentment	is	possible
in	fact,	is	only	possible	right	now	you	cannot	postpone	it
if	you	postpone	it	you	have	turned	it	into	a	desire	if	somebody	says	i	would	like
to	be	contented	he	is	talking	nonsense
because	he	is	talking	in	terms	of	desire,	and	desire	is	just	the	polar	opposite	of
contentment	one	has	simply	to	see	that	desire	takes	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
into	the	non-existential	future	contentment	is	 to	live	this	moment	in	its	 totality,
passionately	without	diverting	your	mind	anywhere	else	from	the	moment	if	one
can	live	each	moment	with	totality,	intensity	then	contentment	follows	you	like	a
shadow	it	is	always	with	you
and	 to	be	 contented	 is	 the	whole	of	 religion	one	need	not	 be	 a	 christian	nor	 a
hindu	or	a	mohammedan	one	needs	only	to	be	contented	to	be	religious	only	a
contented	heart	can	love	that's	why	you	see	in	the	world	everybody	wants	to	love
and	 to	 be	 loved	 but	 it	 does	 not	 happen,	 it	 cannot	 happen	 because	 the	 basic
requirement	 is	 missing	 without	 a	 background	 of	 deep	 contentment	 one	 is	 not
capable	of	sharing	love	love	is	the	fragrance	of	the	flower	of	contentment	and	if
the	flower	is	not	there,	you	can	pretend	at	the	most	you	can	deceive	others	and
yourself	but	it	is	not	going	to	fulfil	pretensions	can't	help,	one	remains	frustrated
everybody	is	trying	to	give	love	but	in	fact	what	people	give	to	each	other	is	only
misery,	not	love
lovers	become	imprisonments	to	each	other	they	don't	become	freedom
and	love	makes	the	other	absolutely	free	but	because	love	is	not	there	the	pseudo
love	simply	tries	to	possess	the	other	and	the	moment	you	possess	the	other	you
are	insulting	the	other	because	you	are	trying
to	 make	 a	 property	 of	 the	 other	 this	 is	 the	 greatest	 insult	 hence	 lovers
continuously	quarrel	for	the	simple	reason
that	 both	 are	 trying	 to	 possess	 each	 other	 both	 are	 desiring	 the	 other	 both	 are
trying	to	use	the	other	as	a	means	for	their	own	ends	this	is	not	love
this	 is	 something	 very	 unloving	 it	 may	 be	 even	 hatred	 masquerading	 as	 love
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	violence	--	but	the	label	is	beautiful	but	labels	are	labels
when	you	taste	the	content	then	it	is	poison	so	the	honeymoon	is	over
the	 moment	 you	 have	 gone	 beyond	 the	 label	 when	 you	 have	 opened	 the
container	the	honeymoon	is	over	and	the	misery	begins	all	so-called	love	creates
suffering	in	the	world	for	the	simple	reason
that	we	have	not	prepared	the	ground	for	it	in	my	observation
only	a	contented	heart	can	share	love	because	he	has	so	much	joy	to	share	he	is
not	a	beggar	so	he	is	not	asking	give	me	love
he	simply	gives	because	he	has	so	much	he	is	like	a	raincloud
so	full	of	rainwater	he	has	to	shower	he	does	not	make	the	other	feel	obliged	to
him	either	in	fact	he	feels	obliged
that	the	other	accepted	his	gift	he	could	have	rejected
when	love	comes	out	of	your	abundance	not	out	of	an	empty	heart
which	 wants	 somehow	 to	 stuff	 itself	 with	 something	 when	 it	 comes	 as	 an
overflowing	joy	then	only	it	gives	freedom	then	only	it	creates	a	paradise	around
itself	wherever	a	man	of	contentment	is,	there	is	paradise	it	has	been	said	in	the
past	that	the	contented	people	enter	paradise	i	say	that	is	not	right
the	contented	people	don't	enter	paradise	the	contented	people,	wherever	they	are
create	paradise
you	can	throw	them	in	hell	and	they	will	create	paradise	there	one	cannot	desire
truth,	god,	liberation,	nirvana	if	you	desire	you	have	not	understood	at	all	desire
is	the	barrier	not	the	bridge	desire	is	the	wall	that	prevents	you	from	the	ultimate
union	with	existence	the	moment	you	drop	desiring	immediately,	instantly
a	melting,	a	merging	starts	happening	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	desire	that	creates	a	boundary	around	you	it	makes	a	fence	around	you	and
keeps	you	separate
it	makes	you	like	an	island	and	to	be	separated	from	existence	is	the	only	misery,
the	only	anguish	because	we	are	waves	 in	 the	ocean	of	 the	 infinite	we	are	not
separate
the	very	idea	of	being	separate	is	false	but	we	can	live	in	that	false	idea	and	to
live	in	the	false	is	to	suffer	to	live	in	the	real	is	to	celebrate	we	have	to	disappear
into	the	ocean	like	a	dewdrop	slipping	from	the	lotus	leaf	only	a	contented	heart
is	 capable	 of	 disappearing	 into	 the	 ocean	 of	 the	 whole	 but	 one	 does	 not	 lose
anything,	one	gains	of	course	one	disappears	as	a	dewdrop	but	one	becomes	the
ocean
it	is	not	a	loss,	it	is	immense	gain	of	course	before	you	have	entered	the	ocean
there	 is	 fear	 that	 you	will	 be	 losing	 your	 identity	 even	 the	 dewdrops	must	 be
trembling,	afraid	trying	to	cling	to	the	lotus	leaf	and	that	is	the	fear	of	all	human
beings	 we	 are	 clinging	 to	 our	 egos	 e	 are	 clinging	 to	 our	 boundaries	 we	 are
clinging	even	to	our	chains	because	we	think	they	are	our	identity	our	name,	our
form,	they	are	all	 invented	things	we	come	in	the	world	without	any	name	and
no	form	is	ours
just	watch	the	whole	process	of	a	child	growing	in	the	mother's	womb	from	the
first	moment
to	the	time	when	the	body	is	taken	to	the	grave	how	many	forms	come	and	go	no
form	 is	 yours,	millions	 of	 forms	 the	moment	 your	mother	 became	 pregnant	 if
that	small,	atomic	cell	is	shown	to	you	or	a	picture	of	it	is	shown	to	you	you	will
not	believe	 that	 this	 is	me	but	 this	was	your	 form	one	day	 in	 fact	 it	will	be	so
small	 you	 will	 not	 be	 able	 to	 see	 it	 with	 your	 bare	 eyes	 you	 will	 need	 a
microscope	you	will	need	something	to	magnify	it	only	then	will	you	be	able	to
see	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
and	 you	will	 not	 recognise	 your	 face	 there	will	 be	 no	 face,	 no	 hands,	 no	 legs
nothing	at	all	--	this	is	you?	you	cannot	believe	a	woman	was	showing	her	small
child	the	album	of	their	family
and	they	came	across	a	picture	of	a	beautiful	young	man
with	long	hair,	black	hair	and	the	child	was	interested	and	he	asked	who	is	this,
mum?
and	the	mother	said	this	is	your	papa	and	the	child	said	this	is	my	papa?
then	who	is	this	guy	who	lives	with	us?
i	was	always	thinking	that	he	is	our	papa	forms	go	on	changing	continuously	you
don't	have	any	form
you	don't	bring	any	name	with	you	to	understand	it,	to	see	it,	to	realise	it	helps
immensely
then	it	is	not	very	difficult	to	allow	oneself	the	quantum	leap	from	the	individual
to	the	whole	to	me,	to	become	one	with	the	whole	is	 the	only	holiness	there	is
contentment	 is	 a	 beautiful	 flower	 of	 immense	beauty,	 of	 great	 fragrance	 being
with	a	contented	man	you	can	immediately	feel
a	cool	breeze,	a	fresh	breeze	if	you	have	eyes	you	can	even	see	if	you	have	ears
you	can	hear	the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
jesus	says	again	and	again	to	his	disciples	if	you	have	eyes,	see;	if	you	have	ears,
hear	he	is	not	talking	to	blind	people	or	deaf	people	he	is	talking	to	people	just
like	you	who	have	eyes	but	their	eyes	are	so	clouded	they	cannot	see	their	noses
are	so	blocked	they	cannot	smell	their	ears	at	the	most	can	hear	but	cannot	listen
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	psychotherapist
was	talking	to	a	child	whose	mother	had	brought	the	child	to	the	psychotherapist
and	 the	mother	 talked	and	 talked	 for	one	hour	 the	child	was	 sitting	 there	 as	 if
utterly	deaf	finally	the	psychotherapist	asked	the	child	do	you	have	any	trouble
with	hearing?
the	child	said	no,	i	have	no	trouble	with	hearing	but	i	have	trouble	with	listening
and	the	child
is	making	an	immensely	beautiful	distinction	between	hearing	and	listening	and
the	 psychotherapist	 could	 understand	 the	mother	 is	 talking	 too	much	 anybody
would	 have	 difficulty	 in	 listening	 hearing	 is	 okay,	 hearing	 is	 a	 physiological
thing	just	your	eardrums	have	to	be	right	and	you	will	hear	but	listening	means
not	 only	 your	 ears	 are	 functioning	 but	 your	 ears	 are	 also	 joined	 with	 your
attention	you	are	paying	attention
you	are	fully	aware	of	what	 is	happening	when	awareness	 joins	with	your	ears
then	listening	happens
when	awareness	joins	with	your	eyes	then	seeing	happens
when	awareness	joins	with	your	hands	then	touching	happens
otherwise	 one	 can	 touch	mechanically	 contentment	 is	 something	 invisible	 the
person	who	has	it	experiences	it	but	a	few	others	who	are	sensitive	they	can	also
feel	it
the	very	presence	of	it	is	almost	tangible	to	the	alert,	to	the	attentive	that's	how
for	thousands	of	years	disciples	have	been	finding	the	masters	there	is	no	other
way,	no	other	criterion	it	is	not	a	question	of	logic	not	a	question	of	intellect	it	is
a	question	of	feeling	when	the	disciple	feels	the	contentment	when	the	disciple
can	smell	 the	 fragrance	of	contentment	 then	he	knows	 that	he	has	come	home
that	this	is	the	place	where	he	belongs	that	this	is	the	man	to	be	with	that	this	is
the	light
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
i	have	been	seeking	and	searching	no	visible	criterion	is	possible	it	 is	certainly
invisible,	a	transmission	beyond	words	but	if	awareness	is	there
then	it	is	not	something	you	have	to	imagine	it	is	very	tangible,	you	can	touch	it
you	can	hold	it	in	your	hand	your	heart	starts	beating	with	a	new	rhythm	in	the
east	we	have	called	it	one-thousand-petalled	lotus	--	sahasrar	when	one	becomes
really	contented	then	in	the	lake	of	one's	consciousness	a	one-thousand-petalled
lotus	opens	up	 that	 is	 the	ultimate	peak	of	 life	 to	die	without	knowing	 it	 is	 to
have	 lived	 in	 vain	 and	 it	 is,	 remember,	 everybody's	 birthright	 just	 one	 has	 to
claim	it
it	is	there	as	a	potential,	it	can	be	actualised	only	a	commitment,	an	involvement,
a	decisiveness	to	make	it	a	realisation	is	needed	that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about	a
commitment	that	i	am	going	to	work	in	every	possible	way	i	am	going	to	put	my
whole	 energy	 into	 transforming	my	being	 into	 a	 beautiful	 flower	 and	 the	very
decisiveness
and	the	flower	starts	opening	the	moment	your	heart	is	totally	involved	with	it	a
miracle	happens
something	 suddenly	 starts	moving	within	 your	 being	 a	 new	 energy	which	 has
remained	dormant	for	long	becomes	dynamic
when	one	is	contented	within	one	becomes	detached
from	a	 thousand	and	one	 things	one	 remains	 in	 life,	one	does	not	escape	 from
life	but	one	lives	in	a	totally	new	way	in	the	world	and	yet	not	of	the	world	that
is	detachment
one	is	in	the	world	but	the	world	is	not	within	oneself	that	is	detachment
i	am	against	all	escapist	attitudes	i	don't	support	the	idea	of	people	escaping	to
the	mountains,	to	the	deserts,	to	the	caves	to	the	monasteries
no,	not	at	all
it	is	because	of	this	escapist	attitude	in	the	past	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	humanity	has	suffered	much	religion	should	be	a	way	of	 life	not	a	way	of
renouncing	life	it	should	be	the	art	of	living	life	it	should	not	be	cowardly
in	 fact	 all	 the	 religions	 in	 the	 past	 have	 been	 teaching	 cowardliness	 all	 their
monks	and	nuns	were	nothing	but	hippies	i	mean	literally
they	had	shown	their	hips	to	the	world	they	were	real	hippies,	they	escaped	from
the	world	my	sannyasins	have	to	live	in	the	world	but	live	in	a	totally	new	way
to	live	in	the	world
as	a	lotus	flower	lives	in	the	lake	the	lotus	flower	is	the	symbol	of	sannyas	the
lotus	flower	has	a	tremendous	quality	about	it	it	lives	in	the	water	but	untouched
by	 the	 water	 it	 is	 so	 velvety	 that	 the	 water	 cannot	 touch	 it	 even	 in	 the	 early
morning
when	dewdrops	gather	on	its	leaves	and	on	its	petals	it	remains	dry,	it	does	not
become	wet	those	dewdrops	are	there	but	they	are	not	touching	the	lotus	leaf	or
the	lotus	petals	that's	how	a	sannyasin	should	live	utterly	contented,	utterly	silent
in	 the	 world	 and	 yet	 not	 of	 the	 world	 The	 Sound	 of	 One	 Hand	 Clapping
Chapter	#18
Chapter	title:	None
18	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103185
ShortTitle:	CLAPP18
Audio:
No
Video:
No
the	moment	one	becomes	blissful	one	becomes	simultaneously	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
a	beloved	of	the	whole	existence	the	miserable	remains	separate	from	the	whole
misery	creates	a	kind	of	boundary	it	creates	a	prison
blissfulness	is	nothing	but	melting,	merging	disappearing	in	the	whole
misery	is	centered	in	the	ego,	bliss	is	egolessness	and	the	ego	can	never	be	the
beloved	of	existence	because	it	is	a	false	entity	the	existence	does	not	give	any
recognition	to	false	entities
hence	the	egoist	suffers,	he	lives	in	hell	only	egolessness	brings	paradise	to	you
to	 be	 initiated	 into	 sannyas	 means	 basically,	 essentially	 initiation	 into
egolessness	bliss	comes	naturally
and	one	becomes	the	beloved	of	the	whole	without	any	effort
it	is	our	birthright
but	we	have	to	drop	the	false	to	be	in	tune	with	the	real	the	experience	of	bliss
needs	as	a	basic	requirement	courageousness	and	nothing	else
the	miserable	is	always	a	coward	for	the	simple	reason
that	he	cannot	drop	even	the	false	he	clings	to	the	false	--	the	ego	not	only	that,
he	 clings	 even	 to	 his	misery	 he	 cannot	 even	 renounce	 his	misery	 remember	 a
basic	law:	misery	does	not	cling	to	you	it	has	no	interest	in	you	--
it	 is	 your	 investment	 in	misery	 it	 is	 your	 clinging	with	misery	 that	 keeps	 you
imprisoned,	keeps	you	in	hell	courage	simply	means
dropping	all	 that	 is	ugly,	all	 that	 is	 false	and	 that	creates	unnecessary	suffering
yes,	 there	 is	 some	 necessary	 suffering	 also	 but	 that	 is	 a	 totally	 different
phenomenon	necessary	suffering
is	that	which	one	has	to	pass	through	if	one	wants	to	reach	to	the	heights	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
then	one	has	to	go	uphill
that	is	necessary	suffering	but	it	is	worth	it,	it	is	a	joy,	in	fact	people	are	clinging
to	unnecessary	misery	which	is	absolutely	not	needed	at	all	it	does	not	help	your
growth	--	 it	hinders	but	courage	 is	needed	to	drop	 it	why	is	courage	needed	to
drop	it?
because	we	have	some	investment	in	it	the	miserable	person	is	getting	attention
through	his	misery	sympathy	through	his	misery	compassion	through	his	misery
the	more	he	gets	people's	sympathy	attention,	kindness,	compassion	the	more	he
becomes	clinging	 to	his	misery	he	knows	it	 is	because	of	misery	 that	he	 is	 the
centre	of	everybody	else's	attention	this	is	fulfilling	his	ego	but	on	the	other	hand
it	is	nursing	his	misery	it	is	keeping	his	wound	alive	it	does	not	allow	the	wound
to	heal	a	simple	courage	is	needed	to	drop	all	this	because	sympathy	is	not	love
compassion	is	not	love
getting	attention	for	wrong	reasons	you	cannot	really	be	contented	and	what	can
attention	give	to	you?
it	can	simply	give	you	a	bigger	ego	which	will	be	more	heavy	to	carry	--	that's
all	you	will	be	burdened	with	it	crushed	under	its	weight
gather	courage	to	drop	all	this	and	the	moment	you	drop	it	immediately	there	is
bliss	because	bliss	is	our	nature	it	has	not	to	be	created,	it	is	already	there	we	just
have	 to	 remove	 the	 hindrances	 that's	 the	 whole	 art	 of	 sannyas	 removing	 the
hindrances
eliminating	the	obstructions	the	moment	those	rocks	are	no	more	there	the	river
of	bliss	starts	flowing	it	starts	moving	towards	the	ocean	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
towards	 the	 ultimate	 bliss	 of	 merging	 with	 the	 whole	 bliss	 is	 always	 young,
always	fresh,	always	green	as	far	as	bliss	is	concerned	it	is	always	spring	the	fall
never	comes,	the	death	never	comes	bliss	is	eternal	life
hence	the	longing	of	everyone	is	to	search	and	seek	bliss,	to	find	it	everybody	is
trying	in	his	own	ways	to	find	it	of	course,	out	of	a	hundred	ways	ninety-nine	are
wrong
hence	very	few	people	attain	it	but	this	is	the	way	life	functions	this	is	the	way
life	 gives	 you	 an	 opportunity	 to	 be	 intelligent,	 to	 be	 aware,	 to	 experiment	 to
make	 mistakes	 and	 errors	 because	 that	 is	 the	 only	 way	 to	 learn	 you	 have	 to
knock	on	ninety-nine	doors	before	you	can	find	the	right	door	even	those	ninety-
nine	doors	are	helpful	don't	think	of	them	as	enemies	because	they	help	you	to
find	the	hundredth	door	they	are	all	pointing	towards	the	hundredth	door	life	is	a
trial	 and	 error	 experiment	 that's	 the	 only	 way	 to	 grow	 to	 sharpen	 one's
intelligence	 if	 there	 was	 only	 one	 door	 then	 there	 would	 be	 no	 difference
between	the	stupid	and	the	intelligent	both	would	enter	from	the	same	door	the
stupid	is	one	who	gets	stuck	in	a	wrong	door	the	intelligent	also	knocks	on	the
wrong	door	but	never	gets	stuck	there	--	he	goes	on	moving	he	goes	on	searching
until	he	finds	the	right	door	it	is	a	beautiful	exploration	a	tremendously	thrilling
adventure	enjoy	the	search,	rejoice	in	the	seeking	and	the	person	who	can	enjoy
the	 very	 search,	 the	 very	 pilgrimage	 is	 not	 far	 away	 from	 the	 right	 door	 he	 is
bound	to	find	it
pleasure	gives	you	 the	appearance	of	bliss	but	 it	 is	not	bliss	 --	 it	 tricks	you,	 it
tickles	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
for	a	moment	it	befools	you,	but	only	for	a	moment	and	again	you	are	back	to
the	 same	 state	 of	 despair	 happiness	 also	 is	 another	 hallucination	 pleasure	 is
physiological,	 happiness	 is	 psychological	 for	 example,	 a	 person	 taking	 some
drug	like	lsd	feels	a	certain	happiness	but	it	is	not	bliss	even	a	man	like	aldous
huxley	was	deceived	a	very	intelligent	man	but	he	believed	that	he	had	attained
through	Lsd	the	same	experience
as	 the	 buddha,	 as	 jesus	 christ,	 as	 lao	 tzu	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 through	 chemicals
chemicals	 can	 only	 create	 a	 dreamworld	 and	when	 their	 effect	 is	 lost	 you	 are
back	on	 the	same	earth,	 in	 the	same	state	even	 in	 fact	 far	more	miserable	 than
before	because	now	you	have	seen	a	dream	beautiful	dream
and	you	will	miss	it
but	this	is	not	new
not	 only	 aldous	 huxley	 is	 deceived	 it	 has	 been	 one	 of	 the	most	 ancient	 things
from	the	ancientmost	scripture	of	the	world,	rigveda	up	to	now,	people	have	been
deceived	by	drugs	 in	 rigveda	 it	 is	 called	 soma	but	 it	 is	 exactly	 something	 like
marijuana,	Lsd,	pscilocybin	one	can	feel	a	dreamworld,	a	beautiful	dreamworld
but	it	does	not	last	and	the	definition	of	bliss	is	that	it	begins	but	it	never	ends	if
it	 ends	 then	 it	 is	 either	 pleasure	 or	 happiness	 either	 physiological	 or
psychological	 but	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 spiritual	 the	 spiritual	 is	 the
dimension	of	eternity	bliss	is	homeless
hence	 it	 is	 ever	green,	 always	young,	 always	 fresh	 the	only	way	 to	 attain	 it	 is
meditation	the	body	cannot	give	it	to	you	the	mind	cannot	give	it	to	you	only	the
state	of	no-mind
that's	what	meditation	is:	a	state	of	no-mind	the	moment	you	enter	into	the	state
of	 no-mind	 in	 that	 immense	 silence,	 that	 profound	 virgin	 silence	 you	 have
entered	 into	 bliss,	 into	 the	world	 of	 bliss	 samo	 is	 a	word	 that	means	 balance,
stillness,	silence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	 simply	 means	 coming	 to	 an	 inner	 space	 within	 you	 where	 there	 is	 no
disturbance	at	all,	no	distraction	where	past	is	no	more	hovering	over	you	where
future	 is	 no	 more	 pulling	 you	 where	 only	 the	 present	 exists	 where	 only	 this
moment	is	all	in	that	silence,	in	that	stillness,	one	hears	the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
the	eternal	music	of	existence	and	that's	what	bliss	is
to	become	part	of	that	eternal	silence	which	is	also	an	eternal	song,	but	a	song	of
silence	unuttered,	unexpressed
a	dance	at	the	innermost	shrine	of	your	being	with	no	movement
it	is	one	of	the	most	mysterious	experiences	a	song	without	any	words
a	dance	without	any	movement	a	music	which	cannot	be	heard	but	can	only	be
tasted,	experienced	the	ordinary	science
is	 concerned	 with	 everything	 except	 bliss	 it	 is	 concerned	 with	 the	 whole
existence	 except	 the	 consciousness	 of	 the	 scientist	 itself	 it	 is	 a	 very	 strange
phenomenon	 that	 the	 scientist	 is	 interested	 in	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 except	 in	 his
own	consciousness	--	who	he	is	that	is	not	his	problem	at	all,	that	is	not	his	quest
the	knower	 remains	unknown	 to	him	and	he	goes	on	accumulating	knowledge
about	everything	else
vigyan	means	a	special	science	special	in	the	sense	that	it	is	concerned	with	the
knowing	of	the	knower	itself	its	only	concern	is	to	know	the	knower	who	am	i?
is	 its	 only	 quest	 and	 the	moment	 you	 know	who	 you	 are	 simultaneously	 you
know	bliss	too	because	you	are	made	of	the	stuff	called	bliss	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	consist	of	only	one	thing	--	that	is	bliss	gautam	the	buddha	used	to	say	if	you
taste	sea	water	from	any	place	it	is	always	salty
if	you	taste	your	consciousness	from	any	door,	from	any	method,	from	any	path
you	will	always	taste	bliss	bliss	takes	you	beyond	time	without	bliss	you	remain
a	slave	of	time	time	is	continuously	changing	hence	to	remain	in	time
means	 constantly	 being	 uprooted	 from	 one	 place	 to	 another	 place	 you	 cannot
grow,	it	is	impossible	to	grow	in	time	it	is	just	continuously	replanting	there	is	no
opportunity	to	grow	roots	to	be	centered,	to	be	grounded	time	is	fleeting	so	fast
and	you	have	to	keep	pace	with	time	you	have	to	go	on	running
you	 have	 to	 go	 on	 being	more	 and	more	 speedy	 to	 keep	 your	 pace	with	 time
otherwise	you	will	be	left	behind	to	live	in	time	means
to	live	a	life	of	continuous	change,	movement	you	cannot	find	even	a	moment's
rest	even	in	your	sleep	you	are	dreaming	that	means	even	in	your	sleep	you	are
running	bliss	is	beyond	time,	hence	instead	of	a	slave	it	makes	you	a	god,	a	god
of	time	time	starts	serving	you
ordinarily	people	serve	time	and	time	ultimately	takes	you	to	death	it	cannot	take
you	anywhere	else	the	grave	is	the	goal
it	makes	you	run	faster	and	faster	and	faster	till	you	fall	in	your	own	grave	then
only	it	leaves	you
it	goes	on	pushing	you	towards	the	grave	in	sanskrit	we	have	one	word	for	both
time	and	death	--	kal
for	the	simple	reason	that	time	means	death	kalesh	means	god	of	time
and	the	moment	you	become	a	master	of	time	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	also	become	a	master	of	death	then	time	serves	you,	death	serves	you	both
become	your	servants
but	the	whole	secret	lies	in	transcending	time	and	it	is	possible,	the	key	is	there
within	us	 the	key	is	 to	get	out	of	 the	mind	mind	is	within	the	grip	of	 time	and
death	the	moment	you	slip	out	of	the	mind	you	are	outside	time	and	death	and	to
slip	out	of	the	mind	takes	you	into	the	world	of	bliss	then	there	is	only	rejoicing
and	eternal	life	bliss	is	multi-dimensional	it	has	many	aspects	to	it
one	 of	 its	 aspects	 is	 it	 is	 a	 flame,	 a	 light	 once	 the	 flame	 is	 lit	 within	 you	 all
darkness	disappears
the	darkness	cannot	exist	with	 the	 flame	and	when	 there	 is	no	darkness	within
you	your	whole	 life	 is	 transformed	because	your	whole	 life	was	dominated	by
darkness	now	it	is	dominated	by	light	darkness	within
whatsoever	you	do	is	going	to	be	wrong	even	the	right,	with	all	good	intentions
is	going	to	be	wrong	--	that	is	inevitable	and	one	can	experience	it
parents	want	to	do	everything	right	for	their	child	of	course	they	think	they	love
the	child	but	they	only	think
deep	down	they	are	so	full	of	darkness	love	is	not	possible
and	 with	 all	 the	 good	 intentions	 they	 start	 crippling	 the	 child,	 paralysing,
poisoning	with	 all	 their	 superstitions	 and	 stupidities	 they	 go	 on	 burdening	 the
child	 they	 are	 trying	 to	make	 the	 child	 live	 exactly	 the	 same	 life	 as	 they	have
lived	and	they	have	never	tasted	bliss	yet	they	want	the	child
to	be	just	a	carbon	copy	of	themselves	it	is	absolutely	unconscious	with	all	good
intentions
they	are	creating	hell	 for	 the	child	 their	parents	created	hell	 for	 them	and	now
they	are	doing	the	same	to	their	children	and	the	children	will	go	on	doing	the
same	to	their	children
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that's	how	from	generation	 to	generation	man	 is	being	poisoned	 from	 the	very
source	the	teachers	are	trying	to	do	something	good	but	all	that	they	manage	to
do	 is	 stuff	 your	mind	with	 borrowed	 knowledge	 they	 themselves	 are	 not	wise
how	can	they	help	you	to	be	wise?
the	 priests	 are	 doing	 everything	 good	 for	 you	 and	 they	 are	 the	 greatest
mischievous	 people	 in	 the	 world,	 not	 knowing	 at	 all	 they	 have	 destroyed	 the
whole	human	past	in	the	name	of	religion
all	kinds	of	crimes	have	been	committed	murders,	people	have	been	burnt	alive
and	 not	 one	 or	 two,	 millions	 of	 people	 in	 the	 name	 of	 god,	 in	 the	 name	 of
christianity	 in	 the	name	of	 islam,	 in	 the	name	of	hinduism	beautiful	names	but
the	reason	is	simple	unless	you	have	your	inner	light	whatsoever	you	do	is	going
to	be	wrong	hence	my	emphasis	is	not	to	do	right	my	emphasis	is	to	be	right	then
whatsoever	you	do	is	going	to	be	right	that	is	secondary
then	there	is	no	need	to	be	worried	about	it	and	to	be	right	means	to	be	full	of
light	bliss	is	a	light,	misery	is	darkness	and	that	light	is	not	far	away	you	are	not
to	travel	to	a	star	to	find	it	you	have	just	to	go	within	--	it	is	just	so	close	to	you
just	 a	 little	 turning,	 a	 hundred-eighty-degree	 turning	 just	 changing	 your	 focus
from	the	outside	and	looking	in	is	enough
once	you	start	looking	in
you	are	bound	to	find	the	flame	it	is	already	there	--	neglected,	ignored	once	you
pay	 attention	 to	 it,	 it	 starts	 burning	 bright	 your	 attention	 becomes	 its	 food	 its
nourishment,	its	fuel
hence	meditation	 is	nothing	but	 the	 art	of	becoming	attentive,	 aware,	 alert	our
whole	education	is	rooted	in	a	false	notion	of	creating	the	ego	in	the	child	even
the	psychologists	 go	on	 emphasising	 that	 the	 ego	has	 to	be	 strengthened	 these
psychologists	also	don't	know	the	experience	of	egolessness	they	are	as	unaware
as	anybody	else	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
as	unenlightened	as	anybody	else	and	in	their	ignorance
they	think	unless	you	have	a	very	strong	ego	you	will	not	be	able	to	compete	in
life	and	it	is	a	tough	competition	you	have	to	be	strong	to	give	a	good	fight	it	is	a
struggle,	the	survival	of	the	fittest	so	you	have	to	be	fit	to	survive	that's	what	our
education	is	it	is	in	fact	miseducation	because	its	whole	foundation	is	wrong	it	is
rooted	in	the	idea	of	the	ego	real	education	will	help	you	to	dissolve	the	ego	to
drop	the	very	idea	of	conflict	struggle,	fight,	war
in	fact	one	has	to	be	in	a	deep	communion	with	the	whole	--	relaxed,	restful,	at
home	to	me	that	is	religiousness	and	the	reward	is	bliss
and	there	cannot	be	any	greater	reward	dissolve	the	ego,	let	it	evaporate	and	only
then	will	you	find	a	tremendous	explosion	of	such	joy
that	you	could	not	have	even	dreamt	of	 it	 before	when	 it	 happens	 for	 the	 first
time	 it	 is	 absolutely	 unbelievable,	 it	 is	 so	 vast	 it	 is	 so	 infinite	 that	 one	 cannot
believe	that	one	is	capable	of	it
one	tries
perhaps	i	am	dreaming,	perhaps	i	am	imagining	but	the	miracle	is	such	that	once
it	happens	it	goes	on	deepening
sooner	 or	 later	 you	 have	 to	 trust	 it	 sooner	 or	 later	 you	 have	 to	 come	 to
understand	that	this	is	what	you	were	missing	this	is	what
you	were	always	seeking	and	searching	unconsciously
ego	is	the	only	barrier
and	 egolessness	 is	 the	 only	 bridge	 to	 god	 one	 has	 to	 become	 a	 nobody,	 a
nothingness	only	then	bliss	happens
because	only	then	there	is	a	space	enough	for	the	infinite	to	become	a	guest	 in
your	being	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
otherwise	we	are	so	much	cluttered	with	all	kinds	of	rubbish,	junk,	crap	that	the
infinite	cannot	be	a	guest	we	cannot	be	a	host	to	the	divine	and	bliss	is	divine,
another	name	for	god	one	can	invite	bliss
only	if	one	has	prepared	one's	being	and	the	preparation	means
if	one	has	emptied	oneself	out	completely	all	 the	 ideologies	have	 to	be	 thrown
out	 all	 the	 scriptures	 have	 to	 be	 burned	 not	 literally,	 not	 the	 scriptures	 on	 the
outside	 they	have	nothing	 to	do	with	you	but	nothing	 inside	 should	 remain	no
ideology,	no	religion,	no	theology	one	should	become	utterly	empty	of	all	ideas
and	 then	 the	miracle	 is	bound	 to	happen	exactly	at	 the	moment	you	are	 totally
empty	it	happens
and	it	does	not	happen
as	 if	 something	 is	 coming	 from	 the	outside	 it	 happens	 exactly	 at	 the	 centre	of
your	being	as	if	something	has	suddenly	blossomed	in	you	it	was	always	there	as
a	potential;	it	becomes	actual	we	have	only	to	create	space	and	any	limited	space
won't	do	it	has	to	be	unlimited
hence	 i	 say	one	has	 to	become	a	 zero	 the	moment	 the	 zero	 is	 there	perfection
happens	on	its	own	accord	bliss	and	wisdom	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin	only
a	blissful	person	is	wise	and	only	a	wise	person	is	blissful	they	happen	together
the	fool	cannot	be	blissful	howsoever	scholarly	he	is
howsoever	knowledgeable	he	is	he	cannot	be	blissful
and	the	blissful	person
howsoever	uneducated	he	is,	uninformed	cannot	be	other	than	wise
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	cannot	be	otherwise
jesus	 is	 not	 a	 knowledgeable	 person	 neither	 is	mohammed	nor	 is	 kabir	 all	 the
three	are	uneducated,	 absolutely	uneducated	not	great	 scholars	or	philosophers
not	knowledgeable	in	any	way	just	innocent	people
but	 immensely	 wise,	 absolutely	 wise	 their	 wisdom	 knows	 no	 bounds	 their
wisdom	is	as	vast	as	the	whole	sky	their	wisdom	is	infinite
hence	wisdom	has	to	be	understood	what	actually	it	is
it	is	knowing	your	own	being	it	is	an	experience	of	your	own	innermost	core	it	is
entering	 into	 your	 own	 centre	 the	 moment	 you	 enter	 your	 very	 centre	 the
innermost	shrine	of	your	being	a	miracle	happens
you	are	innocent	and	yet
you	 have	 such	 tremendous	 insight	 into	 everything	 it	 is	 not	 knowledge,	 it	 is
insight	your	life	is	lived	now	in	a	wise	way	your	each	step	is	full	of	wisdom	your
each	word	contains	scriptures	even	your	silence	is	a	sermon	and	the	miracle	of
this	 blissfulness,	 this	 wisdom	 happens	 through	 a	 simple	 art	 of	 watching	 your
mind
mind	is	knowledge
if	you	can	watch	your	mind	in	all	its	functions	if	you	can	watch	all	its	knowledge
you	become	separate	from	it	the	watcher	becomes	separate	from	the	watched	and
that	very	separation
is	the	beginning	of	bliss	and	wisdom	when	you	are	totally	aware	that	you	are	not
the	mind	you	have	prepared	yourself	for	the	miracle	to	happen
it	inevitably	happens
just	we	have	to	be	ready	for	it	sannyas	is	a	preparation	for	wisdom,	for	bliss	for
freedom,	for	love	--	for	all	that	is	really	valuable	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#19
Chapter	title:	None
19	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103195
ShortTitle:	CLAPP19
Audio:
No
Video:
No
all	power	is	divine
we	are	only	vehicles,	passages	we	are	like	a	hollow	bamboo	flute	our	function	is
to	allow	god	to	flow	through	us	the	song	is	divine
the	song	does	not	belong	to	the	flute	all	that	the	flute	can	do	is	not	to	disturb	it
not	to	block	it,	not	to	hinder	it,	but	to	allow	it	the	function	of	the	flute	is	in	a	way
negative	just	not	to	obstruct
and	then	the	song	goes	on	flowing	that's	where	our	ego	creates	trouble	the	ego	is
a	block
it	fills	the	hollow	bamboo	flute	and	stops	the	song	from	flowing	through	it	then
life	becomes	obviously	a	misery,	an	anguish	it	misses	the	song	--	that	song	is	our
very	life	god	is	our	very	life
god	 is	 not	 some	person	 somewhere	 but	 our	 very	 heartbeat,	 our	 very	 existence
and	 the	 ego	 is	 our	 enemy	 but	 very	 cunning	 it	 pretends	 to	 be	 our	 friend,	 our
greatest	friend	sannyas	simply	means
seeing	 the	 destructiveness	 of	 the	 ego	 and	 dropping	 it...	 in	 a	 single	 blow,	 not
gradually	it	cannot	be	dropped	gradually	either	one	sees	the	point	and	drops	it	or
one	goes	on	carrying	it	hoping	some	day	to	drop	it	but	that	very	hope	is	illusory
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
when	your	house	is	on	fire	you	don't	wait	for	tomorrow	you	rush	out	of	it
you	don't	 even	 think	 to	 get	 out	 in	 a	 proper	way	 from	 the	main	 gate,	 from	 the
main	door	you	even	 jump	out	of	a	window	and	 if	you	are	 taking	a	bath	naked
you	jump	naked	out	of	the	window	you	don't	even	wait	to	wrap	around	a	towel
when	the	house	is	on	fire
one	cannot	postpone	even	for	a	single	moment	and	the	house	is	on	fire
everybody	is	suffering,	everybody	is	burning	in	hell	everybody	is	living	in	such
misery,	anguish	there	is	no	joy,	no	song,	no	dance	for	the	simple	reason
because	 these	 things	belong	 to	god,	not	 to	us	 they	can	belong	 to	us	only	 if	we
disappear	if	we	are	not	in	the	way,	if	we	allow	god	to	flow	through	us
in	that	absolute	let-go
in	that	surrender	is	sannyas	sannyas	is	not	surrender	to	me	it	is	not	surrender	to
anybody	 in	 particular	 it	 is	 simply	 surrender	 to	 the	whole	 to	 this	 vast,	 infinite
existence	and	the	moment	you	dissolve	yourself	in	it	life	becomes	a	sheer	joy
man	without	the	experience	of	the	divine	is	nothing	but	a	darkness,	an	unending
darkness	a	dark	night	of	the	soul
and	all	hope	for	the	dawn	is	futile	it	is	not	going	to	come
unless	we	invite	 the	divine	 the	dawn	cannot	come	we	have	 to	become	hosts	 to
the	divine	that's	what	meditation	is	all	about	creating	a	receptivity	for	the	divine
to	 come	 in	 and	 the	 divine	 certainly	 comes	 like	 a	 flame	 the	moment	 the	 flame
enters	you	you	become	aflame
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
your	whole	life	is	transformed	into	light	the	sun	does	not	rise	on	the	outside,	it
rises	within	and	once	there	is	light	within	your	whole	life	has	a	luminosity	each
act	has	a	tremendous	beauty	to	it,	a	grace	a	totality,	a	passionate	intensity	each
moment
becomes	so	tremendously	deep	and	profound	that	it	starts	containing	the	whole
eternity	in	it	all	that	is	needed	on	our	part	is	to	be	totally	vulnerable,	available,
open	the	guest	is	always	knocking	on	the	door	but	our	doors	are	closed
the	flame	wants	to	enter	in	but	we	don't	allow	it	we	live	in	fear	and	for	thousands
of	 years	 religions	 have	 been	 teaching	 people	 to	 live	 in	 fear	 in	 fact	 they	 call	 a
religious	person	a	god-fearing	person
that	is	sheer	nonsense
god	is	nothing	to	be	afraid	of	a	religious	person
is	a	god-loving	person	not	god-fearing	why	should	he	fear?
and	if	you	are	even	afraid	of	god	whom	are	you	going	to	love?	--	because	god	is
all	 my	 sannyasins	 have	 to	 change	 the	 whole	 gestalt	 that	 has	 been	 implanted
within	you	by	the	society	i	teach	love	not	fear
and	only	love	can	be	open
only	love	can	be	inviting,	only	love	can	trust	and	the	moment	you	trust
you	 can	 open	 the	 doors	 of	 your	 heart	 and	 immediately,	 instantly,	 the	 miracle
happens	the	word	ecstasy	is	of	immense	significance	literally	it	means	to	stand
outside	yourself	that's	the	actual	meaning	of	ecstasy	standing	outside	of	yourself,
standing	out	of	the	ego	and	the	moment	you	are	out	of	the	ego	you	are	in	god
to	be	in	the	ego
is	to	be	millions	of	miles	away	from	god	and	to	be	out	of	the	ego
is	to	be	at	the	very	heart	of	the	divine	and	if	one	understands,	if	one	tries	to	see
the	point	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
it	is	not	difficult
because	the	ego
has	never	brought	any	joy	to	anybody	it	only	brings	agony
it	brings	more	and	more	pain	more	and	more	suffering
ego	is	like	a	wound
that	continuously	hurts	and	is	very	touchy	to	come	out	of	the	ego	is	to	be	healed
is	to	be	whole,	is	to	be	holy	and	to	come	out	of	the	ego	nothing	else	is	needed
only	one	thing
a	deep	insight	into	the	very	phenomenon	of	the	ego	what	it	has	brought
it	promises	much	but	it	never	delivers	the	goods	n	the	whole	history	of	humanity
not	 a	 single	 person	 has	 been	 able	 to	 say	 ego	 has	 given	 me	 bliss	 and	 all	 the
persons	who	have	lived	blissfully	have	said,	without	any	exception	that	bliss	has
happened
only	when	they	dropped	the	ego	the	mathematics	is	very	simple	it	is	one	of	the
most	absolute	laws	of	life	without	any	exception
it	is	the	very	science	of	religion	get	out	of	the	ego	and	suddenly	the	spring	comes
and	thousands	of	flowers	start	blossoming	in	you	sannyas	is	a	divine	revolution
it	is	not	a	modification,	a	reformation	it	is	revolution
it	is	dropping	the	past	absolutely	and	entering	into	a	totally	new	dimension	only
then	one	can	taste	what	godliness	is	if	you	carry	your	past	with	you,	you	remain
old	and	every	day	you	go	on	becoming	older	because	 the	past	becomes	bigger
and	bigger	and	heavier	and	heavier
if	you	drop	the	whole	past	and	start	afresh	you	are	again	young
and	 only	 the	 young	 consciousness	 can	 have	 a	 contact	with	 the	 divine	 because
there	is	nothing	in	between	if	you	are	carrying	the	past	then	the	past	functions	as
a	barrier,	as	a	wall	it	 is	a	china	wall,	very	thick	and	it	goes	on	growing	thicker
every	moment	because	every	moment	the	past	is	becoming	bigger	something	is
added	to	the	past	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
sannyas	begins	when	you	drop	the	past	and	suddenly
you	feel	a	weightlessness,	as	if	you	can	fly	and	then	one	has	to	remember	not	to
accumulate	the	past	again	then	one	has	to	die	every	moment	to	the	past	so	that
one	is	reborn	every	moment	to	the	present	that's	the	only	true	way	to	live	dying
to	the	past
living	in	the	present
that	contains	my	whole	religion	man	is	capable	of	melting	and	merging	into	his
own	innermost	core	and	that	is	the	space	where	absolute	silence	reigns	where	no
noise	has	ever	penetrated	it	is	against	nature	and	the	law	of	nature	no	noise	can
ever	enter	into	your	innermost	shrine	the	silence	is	virgin
but	it	is	not	a	dead	silence	it	is	very	alive,	it	is	full	of	music	it	has	a	song	of	its
own
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
it	has	a	dance	of	its	own
but	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 express	 it	 in	 language	 language	 is	made	 to	 express	 the
noise	 of	 the	 mind	 beyond	 the	 mind	 is	 your	 silence	 hence	 there	 is	 no	 way	 to
express	it	but	it	can	be	experienced
and	 that's	 the	only	 thing	 that	matters:	experience	and	 its	experience	 transforms
you	 then	 your	 whole	 life	 becomes	 a	 celebration	 a	 subtle	 undercurrent	 of	 joy
permeates	you	pervades	you
you	live	in	the	world
you	live	in	the	whole	noise	of	the	world	but	now	it	doesn't	matter
because	now
it	cannot	distract	you	from	your	inner	centre	to	know	that	inner	space
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
is	 to	know	 the	centre	of	 the	cyclone	and	 then	 the	cyclone	 too	 is	beautiful	you
remain	centred	in	all	kinds	of	situations	success	or	failure,	poverty	or	richness,
life	 or	 death	 the	 inner	 centering	 remains	 the	 same	 to	 attain	 it	 is	 the	 goal	 of
sannyas	the	knowledgeable	person
has	no	way	to	know	the	divine	because	his	knowledgeability	gives	him	great	ego
knowledge
is	 the	most	 ego-nourishing	phenomenon	 far	more	 than	money,	political	power,
etcetera	because	political	power	can	be	taken	away	money	can	be	lost,	your	bank
can	go	bankrupt	it	is	easy	to	lose	it
but	 knowledge	 is	 something	 which	 nobody	 can	 take	 away	 from	 you	 hence	 it
gives	the	ego	the	most	stable	ground	the	knowledgeable	person	has	never	known
god	hence	 jesus	says	be	 like	a	small	child	again	and	again	he	repeats	 it	unless
you	 are	 like	 a	 small	 child	 you	 will	 not	 enter	 into	 my	 kingdom	 of	 god	 to
nicodemus	he	says	unless	you	are	born	again	it	is	not	possible	to	experience	the
divine	the	whole	insistence	is	on	innocence	the	same	innocence	as	the	child	has
drop	all	your	knowledge
it	is	rubbish,	it	has	no	inner	value	in	fact	it	is	a	disvalue	it	is	not	a	qualification
for	the	inner	world	but	a	disqualification	unburden	yourself	from	knowledge	and
then	 innocence	 will	 be	 discovered	 and	 that	 is	 really	 treasure	 once	 you	 have
tasted	your	own	innocence	you	have	tasted	god	--	it	is	the	same	call	it	innocence,
call	 it	 godliness	 these	 are	 different	 names	 for	 the	 same	 experience	 silence	 has
three	 gates	 to	 pass	 one	 is	 the	 most	 peripheral:	 speaking	 speak	 only
telegraphically	speak	the	essential	and	you	will	be	surprised	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	almost	ninety	per	cent	of	your	talking	is	useless	only	ten	per	cent	will	do
and	 you	 will	 also	 be	 surprised	 that	 ten	 per	 cent	 will	 become	 more	 effective
because	that	ninety	per	cent	that	unnecessary	burden
is	no	more	there
words	 become	 more	 pregnant	 when	 you	 don't	 go	 round-about	 when	 you	 go
directly
and	if	one	has	to	be	telegraphic	one	has	to	go	directly
that's	 why	 you	 can	 write	 a	 long	 letter	 but	 it	 doesn't	 have	 that	 effect	 a	 small
telegram	is	more	effective	 in	 india	 this	 is	a	common	practice	people	will	write
long	letters	and	in	the	end	they	will	write	think	of	it	as	a	telegram
but	how	to	think	after	such	a	long	letter?
a	 telegram	 has	 to	 be	 telegraphic	 all	 the	 great	 scriptures	 of	 the	 world	 are
telegraphic	 that	 is	 the	meaning	 of	 the	 sanskrit	word	 sutra	 just	 a	 hint	 has	 been
given	but	very	pregnant	this	is	the	first	step
be	 telegraphic,	 speak	 the	 essential	 and	 drop	 the	 non-essential	 and	 then	 the
second	step
think	only	the	essential
and	you	will	be	surprised
ninety-nine	per	cent	is	unessential	only	one	percent	maybe	is	essential	that	too	i
say	 maybe,	 perhaps	 otherwise	 it	 is	 all	 holy	 cow	 dung	 so	 drop	 thinking
unnecessarily	about	unnecessary	things
and	people	are	thinking	about	all	kinds	of	things	relevant,	irrelevant
i	receive	such	questions
why	do	dogs	bark	at	the	moon?
now	the	person	who	is	thinking	this	question	is	really	a	great	thinker
he	is	neither	a	dog,	nor	is	he	a	moon	what	is	his	concern	about	it?	Let	the	dogs
bark	it	is	something	between	the	dog	and	the	moon	you	are	unnecessarily	poking
your	nose	in	it	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	just	curiosity
and	people	go	on	thinking	about	useless	things	so	drop	useless	thinking
and	you	will	be	saving	so	much	energy	that	the	third	step	can	be	taken	the	third
step	is	the	most	subtle	feel	only	the	essential
and	if	you	come	to	the	essential	then	there	is	only	love
anger,	greed,	lust
all	these	things	are	non-essential	they	are	parasites,	they	are	exploiting	you	when
you	come	to	the	essential	only	love	remains	and	when	your	heart	is	only	full	of
love	you	can	enter	 into	 the	very	centre	of	silence	these	 three	 things	have	to	be
passed	the	outer	part	of	the	mind	--	talking	the	inner	part	of	the	mind	--	thinking
and	the	innermost	part	of	the	mind	--	feeling	and	when	you	have	passed	all	these
three	then	there	is	silence
and	that	silence	is	the	door	to	the	divine	freedom	is	one	of	the	most	fundamental
things	and	we	are	living	in	all	kinds	of	bondages	the	bondage	of	a	certain	church
the	bondage	of	a	certain	race	the	bondage	of	a	certain	nationality	and	so	on	and
so	forth
these	 are	 all	 imprisonments,	 prisons	within	 prisons	 and	 if	 one	 really	wants	 to
know	 the	 truth	 one	 has	 to	 get	 out	 of	 all	 this	 stupidity	 that	 humanity	 has	 been
carrying	for	thousands	of	years
one	has	just	to	be	a	consciousness	a	pure	consciousness
that	is	freedom
neither	 hindu	nor	mohammedan	nor	 christian	neither	 atheist	 nor	 theist,	 neither
black	nor	white	these	are	non-essential	things	one	should	not	get	lost
in	 the	 jungle	of	 the	non-essential	 the	essential	 thing	 is	your	consciousness	and
consciousness
is	neither	hindu	nor	mohammedan	nor	christian	nor	jew
it	 is	 not	 even	masculine	 or	 feminine	 it	 is	 neither	 black	 nor	white	 it	 is	 neither
young	nor	old	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
no	category	 is	applicable	 to	 it	 it	 is	beyond	all	categories	hence	 it	has	 immense
freedom	freedom	is	divine
because	 it	 allows	 you	 to	 know	 the	 truth	 freedom	 means	 freedom	 from	 all
prejudices	from	all	a	priori	conclusions	a	child	met	the	priest	of	the	town	in	the
garden	he	 said	 good	morning,	 father	 the	 priest	 looked	 at	 the	 child,	 a	 beautiful
child	and	the	way	he	greeted	him	he	asked	him,	but	i	never	see	you	in	the	church
the	 child	 said,	 that's	 true	 because	 i	 don't	 belong	 to	 your	 abomination	 these
denominations	 are	 really	 abominations	 these	 churches,	 these	 temples,	 these
mosques	are	nothing	but	beautiful	ways	of	creating	prisoners	be	free	so	that	you
can	 be	 yourself	 initiation	 into	 sannyas	 is	 initiation	 into	 freedom	 into	 being
yourself
i	don't	give	you	any	creed,	any	dogma	any	abomination
i	simply	want	you	to	be	utterly	yourself	and	then	god	is	not	far	away	he	is	just	by
the	corner
we	have	not	lost	anything,	we	have	just	forgotten	god	is	still	there,	truth	is	still
there	 love	 is	 still	 there,	 bliss	 is	 still	 there	 nothing	 has	 been	 lost	 but	 we	 have
forgotten	 it	we	 are	 living	 in	 a	 kind	 of	 sleep	we	need	 a	 certain	 awakening	 and
that's	the	function	of	a	master	to	hit	the	disciple
in	such	a	way	that	he	has	to	wake	up	and	certainly	the	master	has	to	be	merciless
out	of	compassion	he	has	 to	be	merciless	he	has	 to	hit	hard	on	 the	head	 just	a
good	hit	on	the	head	and	one	wakes	up	all	the	methods	of	meditation	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
are	nothing	but	certain	ways	of	hitting	 the	very	source	of	your	sleepiness	once
you	start	awakening,	 just	a	 little	wakefulness	 is	enough	to	remind	you	of	what
you	have	forgotten	and	then	there	is	no	problem	then	you	can	start	working	on
your	own	searching	inside,	where	you	have	put	things	and	how	you	forgot
sati	is	a	beautiful	word
it	contains	the	essential	core	of	all	spiritual	methods	remembering
so	one	need	not	be	worried	because	nothing	is	lost	one	should	rejoice	that	even	if
we	have	forgotten	it	is	still	there
so	just	a	little	effort	is	needed	to	wake	up	just	a	little	effort	to	come	out	of	your
dreams	and	anything	can	be	of	help	sometimes	even	accidents	can	help	just	for	a
moment	 you	 lose	 your	 sleepiness	 and	 suddenly	 all	 is	 remembered	 this
remembrance	 happens	 always	 in	 a	 sudden	 way	 hence	 my	 way	 is	 the	 way	 of
sudden	 enlightenment	 one	 goes	 on	 hitting	 one's	 head	 against	 many	 things
because	one	never	knows	which	hit	from	what	source,	is	going	to	help	it	may	be
the	same	pillow	that	you	hit	or	the	same	pillar	again	and	again	one	never	knows
it	may	be	the	ninety-ninth	number	or	the	hundredth	but	there	comes	a	point
when	remembrance	happens
sometimes	 it	 can	 happen	 even	 in	 the	 first	 hit	 it	 depends	 how	 thick	 is	 the
sleepiness,	 how	 dense	 people	 have	 different	 layers	 it	 depends	 on	 their
conditioning	how	they	have	been	conditioned	every	child	has	been	conditioned
so	every	child	will	need	a	certain	hit	to	be	with	a	master
is	 possible	only	 if	 you	 love	 immensely	because	 the	master	 is	 going	 to	hit	 you
unless	you	trust	you	won't	allow	anybody	to	hit	you	it	is	going	to	be	a	surgical
operation	you	have	to	trust	the	surgeon	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
because	 you	will	 be	 on	 the	 table,	 under	 chloroform	 and	who	 knows	what	 the
surgeon	is	going	to	do?
i	have	heard	about	a	jew
who	was	going	to	be	operated	upon	he	said	wait
he	took	out	his	purse
and	started	counting	his	money	the	doctor	said
there	is	no	need	to	pay	right	now	you	can	pay	later	on
he	said	who	is	going	to	pay?
i	 am	 simply	 counting	 my	 money	 because	 when	 i	 am	 under	 chloroform,	 who
knows?
i	don't	trust	you
he	 is	 trusting	 him	 for	 the	 operation	 but	 he	 cannot	 trust	 for	 the	money	money
seems	to	be	more	valuable	to	people	than	their	life	itself
but	to	be	with	a	master	one	has	to	understand	it	that	love	is	more	valuable	than
life	itself	the	relationship	between	a	master	and	a	disciple	is	a	love	affair
it	is	the	highest	peak	of	trust	because	it	is	the	greatest	operation	there	is	no	other
operation	bigger	than	this	your	whole	life	has	to	be	transformed	it	is	possible	--
one	just	has	to	allow	it	one	has	to	open	one's	heart	so	that	one	is	always	ready	to
welcome	the	unknown,	the	unknowable	we	live	in	the	known
and	we	are	afraid	of	the	unknown	so	we	keep	our	doors	closed	to	the	unknown
what	to	say	about	the	unknowable?
to	allow	the	unknown	to	enter	we	are	not	even	ready
but	to	live	in	the	known	means	to	live	in	a	rut	it	is	boring
that's	 why	 the	 whole	 humanity	 seems	 so	 bored	 utterly	 bored,	 bored	 with
everything	unless	one	opens	doors	 to	 the	unknown	 life	never	becomes	a	 joy,	a
deep	 adventure	 the	moment	 you	 open	 the	 doors	 for	 the	 unknown	 the	moment
you	welcome	 the	 unknown	 you	 are	 allowing	 new,	 fresh	winds	 to	 come	 in	 the
rain,	the	sun,	the	stars	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	fragrance	of	the	flowers	and	with	all	these,	slowly	slowly	comes	the	divine
first	you	have	 to	be	open	 to	 the	unknown	and	when	you	have	started	enjoying
then	you	can	risk	one	step	more	you	can	go	a	little	deeper	you	can	become	open
to	the	unknowable	the	world	of	the	unknown
is	the	world	of	poetry,	music,	dance	the	world	of	aesthetics
and	the	world	of	the	unknowable	is	the	world	of	religion
and	 the	 world	 of	 the	 known	 is	 the	 world	 of	 business	 marketplace,	 ordinary
existence	day-to-day	existence
a	 sannyasin	 first	 has	 to	 be	 open	 to	 the	 unknown	 and	 then	 finally	 to	 the
unknowable	 that	 is	 the	 meaning	 of	 swagat:	 a	 welcoming	 heart	 and	 then	 the
impossible	becomes	possible	there	are	two	ways	to	approach	the	divine	one	is	of
meditation,	awareness	the	other	is	of	love
both	are	valid	ways,	their	starting	point	is	different	but	their	ultimate	goal	is	the
same	they	meet	when	you	have	reached	and	not	only	that	they	meet	at	one	point
in	 the	 end	 if	 you	 have	 followed	 the	 way	 of	meditation	 then	 love	 comes	 as	 a
shadow	 to	 it,	 as	 a	 by-product	 if	 you	 have	 followed	 the	 way	 of	 love	 then
meditation	comes	as	a	shadow	of	it	as	a	consequence	of	it
they	happen	 together	 finally	but	 the	 starting	point	 can	be	different	 for	you	my
suggestion	is
love	will	be	 the	best	way	 to	 follow	 love	 the	whole	existence,	 love	as	much	as
you	can	because	the	more	you	love
the	more	capable	of	love	you	will	become	this	is	the	law	of	love
the	more	vou	 love	 the	more	 love	vou	have	 the	 less	you	 love	 the	 less	 love	you
have	when	you	love	infinitely
you	 start	 having	 an	 inexhaustible	 love	 within	 you	 some	 sources	 that	 have
remained	always	hidden	suddenly	open	up
some	springs	which	have	never	been	flowing	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
start	flowing
but	one	has	to	be	unconditional:	love	but	don't	ask	anything	in	return	love	for	the
sheer	joy	of	love	and	then	wait	for	the	miracle	it	happens,	it	happens	inevitably
just	 one	has	 to	 love	 and	wait	 sow	 the	 seeds	of	 love	 and	wait	 and	 the	moment
certainly	 comes	 when	 those	 seeds	 start	 sprouting	 they	 start	 becoming	 plants,
leaves	start	growing	foliage	comes,	then	buds
then	flowers	and	the	fragrance	that	fragrance	is	godliness	love	is	the	beginning,
godliness	is	the	end	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#20
Chapter	title:	None
20	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103205
ShortTitle:	CLAPP20
Audio:
No
Video:
No
the	phenomenon	of	awareness	 is	paradoxical	half	of	 it,	 the	 first	half,	 is	human
effort	the	other	half,	the	second	half,	is	a	divine	gift	one	has	to	do	the	utmost	one
can	do	to	attain	it	but	it	 is	not	attained	only	by	that	it	 is	not	attained	without	it
either	the	human	effort	prepares	you	to	receive	the	gift	if	you	are	unprepared	and
the	gift	comes	you	will	not	even	be	able	to	recognise	it	 there	is	no	question	of
receiving	it,	welcoming	it	so	the	first	part	is	absolutely	necessary	but	one	should
not	 get	 the	 idea	 that	 one	 attains	 it	 through	 effort	 the	 effort	 only	 removes	 the
barriers	it	is	negative
the	moment	the	barriers	are	removed	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	door	is	open,	the	heart	is	available	the	gift	comes,	it	is	a	happening,	it	is	not	a
doing	hence	one	should	not	get	egoistic	about	one's	efforts
because	ultimately	it	happens	effortlessly	it	simply	showers	on	you
and	the	moment	it	showers
one	comes	to	know	that	whatsoever	i	have	done	has	nothing	to	do	with-it
i	was	simply	removing	the	stones	the	rocks	on	the	way
the	guest	was	always	ready	to	come	i	was	only	opening	the	door	the	guest	is	not
my	creation	the	guest	was	already	there	just	waiting	at	the	door
all	that	i	have	done	is	open	the	door	which	is	not	much
but	without	opening	the	door	the	guest	cannot	enter	either	hence	it	is	called	the
effortless	effort	one	has	to	be	really	diligent	it	is	an	uphill	task,	you	have	to	move
upwards	when	 you	 are	 coming	 down	 the	 hill	 there	 is	 no	 effort	 when	 you	 are
going	up	the	hill	immense	effort	is	needed
the	 higher	 the	 altitude	 the	more	 effort	 is	 needed	but	when	you	 reach	 the	 peak
what	you	see	there	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	effort	of	course	your	effort	has
got	 you	 to	 the	 peak	 but	 the	 vision,	 the	 vast	 sky	 and	 the	 immensely	 beautiful
valleys	all	around	the	stars
they	are	not	your	creation	but	you	would	have	missed	them	if	you	had	not	come
to	the	peak	hence	one	has	to	continuously	balance	between	effort	and	no-effort
something	has	to	be	done
and	something	has	not	to	be	done	they	appear	contradictory
they	are	not	--	they	are	complementary	you	have	to	do	your	part
the	moment	your	part	is	fulfilled	existence	does	its	own	part	but	if	you	have	been
half-heartedly	doing	 then	existence	will	not	do	 its	part	you	have	 to	be	 in	your
effort	totally	without	holding	anything	back	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
when	 you	 risk	 all,	 existence	 comes	 with	 immense	 blessings,	 benedictions
existence	 loves	and	 respects	 a	person	who	has	put	 everything	 to	 the	 stake	and
awareness	is	something	that	can	happen	only	when	you	are	totally	devoted	to	it
sannyas	is	nothing	but	an	initiation	first	into	effort
and	 then	 into	 effortless	 receptivity	 existence	 is	 basically	 made	 of	 awareness
science	may	 never	 be	 able	 to	 discover	 it	 because	 science's	 very	methodology
prevents	it	but	still	science	has	come	very	close	to	it	just	thirty	years	ago
science	was	absolutely	certain	that	existence	consists	of	matter	now	it	is	no	more
so
matter	is	dead,	matter	has	evaporated	matter	exists	not
now	science	says	we	were	deceived	because	of	our	limited	instruments	existence
does	not	consist	of	matter	but	of	pure	energy
but	the	energy	is	revolving	with	such	speed	that	it	creates	the	illusion	of	matter	it
is	just	like	an	electric	fan	going	with	great	speed
and	you	cannot	see	its	three	blades	it	looks	like	a	wheel
that	wheel	is	only	illusory	if	it	really	goes	with	the	speed	of	light	you	can	sit	on	it
and	you	will	not	feel	those	blades	moving	the	speed	will	be	so	much
one	hundred	eighty-six	thousand	miles	per	second	that	you	can	sit	on	it
and	you	will	not	feel	that	anything	is	moving	it	will	be	absolutely	static	for	you
that's	actually	what	is	happening	when	you	see	the	wall
it	seems	to	be	so	solid	--	nothing	is	solid	just	the	speed	is	so	fast
otherwise	you	can	walk	through	it	it	is	just	the	speed
if	 it	 can	 be	 lowered	 a	 little	 bit	 you	 can	 walk	 through	 the	 wall	 through	 the
mountain
there	is	no	problem	because	it	is	pure	energy	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
there	 is	 nothing	 solid	 any	 more	 this	 is	 a	 great	 advance	 that	 science	 has	 to
concede	reluctantly	they	conceded
because	 to	 say	 that	 existence	 consists	 of	 energy	 is	 to	 come	 very	 close	 to	 the
mystics	 they	 have	 always	 been	 saying	 existence	 is	 energy	 they	 say	 something
more	too	they	say	that	energy	is	awareness	science	may	never	be	able	to	know
that	for	the	simple	reason
it	 has	 no	 way	 to	 experience	 awareness	 it	 can	 be	 experienced	 only	 through
meditation	and	the	moment	you	experience	awareness	the	whole	existence
is	immediately	revealed	to	you	as	awareness	not	only	that,	it	starts	converging	on
you	immediately,	instantly	you	become	the	centre	of	it	you	become	the	beloved
of	 the	whole	and	 to	be	beloved	of	 the	whole	 is	 to	be	blissful,	 is	 to	be	ecstatic
because	that	is	the	only	love	that	can	be	eternal	the	more	aware	you	become,	the
more	loving	the	less	aware,	the	less	loving	the	unconscious	person
is	 absolutely	 incapable	 of	 love	 neither	 can	 he	 give	 nor	 can	 he	 receive	 and
everybody	 is	 hankering	 longing	 to	 love	 and	 to	 be	 loved	 but	 everybody	 is
unconscious	it	is	not	possible
it	is	like	a	blind	person	trying	to	see	the	light	and	trying	to	see	the	colour	of	the
flowers	and	trying	to	see	the	stars	because	people	talk	so	much	of	their	beauty
but	how	can	the	blind	man	see	the	colours	of	the	flowers	and	the	rainbow	and	the
stars	and	the	moon?
it	is	impossible
what	is	needed	is	not	any	effort	to	come	to	come	to	the	flower,	to	look	at	the	sky
because	those	blind	eyes
even	if	turned	towards	the	sky	will	not	see	the	stars
the	blind	person	needs	his	 eyes	 to	be	 cured	he	needs	 a	physician,	he	does	not
need	to	be	led	by	poets,	by	philosophers
he	needs	a	physician
and	a	true	master	is	a	physician	not	a	philosopher	he	tries	to	give	you	something
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	is	already	in	you	but	unopened	he	gives	you	a	third	eye,	that	is	awareness	he
helps	you	to	become	aware	and	as	you	start	becoming	aware	you	are	surprised
love	starts	happening	of	its	own	accord	and	you	have	always	been	longing	for	it
and	 now	 it	 is	 coming	 of	 its	 own	 accord	 one	 simply	 becomes	 pure	 love	when
awareness	 has	 blossomed	 when	 the	 flower	 of	 awareness	 is	 there	 there	 is	 the
fragrance	of	love	it	is	inevitable
awareness	is	the	seed	--	it	is	there	it	just	needs	the	right	soil	the	right	climate,	a
right	gardener	and	soon	the	day	will	come	when	the	seed	will	dissolve	into	the
soil	and	the	hidden	will	become	real	the	heart	of	the	seed	will	start	growing	then
flowers	are	not	far	away	the	first	leaves	herald	the	coming	of	the	flowers	sannyas
is	only	a	climate,	a	soil	the	master	is	a	gardener
you	have	all	that	you	need	but	it	is	in	the	potential,	it	has	to	be	actualised	there	is
no	real	difficulty	 in	 its	 realisation	one	 just	has	 to	dissolve	one's	ego	 in	 the	soil
that	ego	is	just	like	the	hard	shell	that	surrounds	the	seed
it	 is	protective	--	 that	 is	 its	 function	but	 if	 that	hard	shell	surrounding	 the	seed
rejects	dissolving	into	the	soil	then	it	is	no	more	protective,	it	is	destructive	the
ego	is	a	necessity	in	the	world	otherwise	you	will	not	be	able	to	survive	there	are
so	many	egos	all	around	they	will	crush	you
they	will	 use	 you	 as	 a	 stepping	 stone	 you	will	 be	 destroyed	 by	 all	 those	 egos
your	own	ego	gives	you	a	certain	protection	a	certain	safety
it	creates	a	hard	barrier	between	you	and	the	others	they	cannot	penetrate	you
it	is	not	easy	to	go	deep	into	you	and	hurt	you	ego	helps	you	not	to	be	hurt	by
others	as	far	as	the	world	is	concerned	it	 is	okay	the	moment	you	start	moving
inwards	the	ego	has	to	dissolve
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
otherwise	it	won't	allow	your	reality	to	blossom	that's	what	sannyas	is
a	readiness	on	the	part	of	the	disciple	to	dissolve	the	ego
and	once	the	ego	is	dissolved	miracles	start	happening
it	is	a	miracle
those	first	two	leaves	coming	out	of	the	ground	one	could	not	have	imagined	that
the	seed	contains	these	two	green	leaves	and	then	the	tree	goes	on
becoming	bigger,	gathering	greater	foliage	it	can	become	a	big	tree
almost	whispering	with	the	clouds	it	can	blossom,	it	can	become	flowers,	fruits
and	only	then	one	is	fulfilled	that	is	the	state	of	buddhahood	the	awakened	state
of	consciousness	awareness	is	a	method
a	means	 to	 attain	 consciousness	 one	 has	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 outer	 world
when	you	are	watching	something	be	alert
don't	just	behave	like	a	zombie	that's	how	people	are	behaving	they	are	looking
at	a	thing	and	not	looking	at	all	because	their	mind	is	somewhere	else	their	eyes
are	 empty,	 there	 is	 no	 attention	 they	 are	 hearing	 something	 but	 they	 are	 not
listening	their	awareness	is	not	there	behind	their	ears	so	this	is	the	first	thing	to
be	done	become	aware	of	the	outside	world	this	noise	of	the	train
or	 an	 aeroplane	 passing	 by	 or	 the	 traffic	 never	 think	 of	 these	 things	 as
distractions	they	are	not
use	them	as	objects	for	becoming	alert	and	aware	and	you	will	be	surprised
everything	can	be	used
and	 then	 there	 is	 no	 distraction	 then	 the	whole	 life	 is	 helping	 you	 to	 become
aware	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
nothing	can	distract	you
you	can	go	into	the	marketplace	and	you	can	use	every	noise	every	nuisance	that
is	going	on	as	an	object	for	becoming	more	alert	in	fact	it	is	easier	to	be	aware	in
a	marketplace	than	in	a	monastery
the	 second	 thing	 to	 be	 aware	 of	 is	 your	 own	 body	 and	 its	 acts,	what	 you	 are
doing	just	becoming	more	aware	of	each	movement	each	gesture
and	that	will	release	an	even	greater	awareness	than	the	outside	world
then	become	aware	of	your	thoughts	and	you	are	coming	closer	to	home	and	the
closer	you	come
more	 and	more	 release	 of	 awareness	will	 be	 there	 then	watch	 your	 emotions,
your	moods	and	you	have	come	very	close	 for	 the	explosion	of	 consciousness
when	you	are	capable	of	watching	the	outside	world	the	physiological	activities
the	activities	of	the	mechanism	of	the	mind	and	the	mechanism	of	the	heart	you
are	ready	for	the	quantum	leap	then	you	can	simply	jump	into	yourself	you	will
suddenly	find	yourself	centred,	grounded	rooted	in	your	own	being
and	that	is	the	flowering	of	consciousness	that's	the	ultimate	goal	of	all	religions
there	is	no	other	truth
truth	is	not	something	outside	you	it	is	the	very	innermost	core	of	your	being	it	is
the	explosion	of	consciousness	awareness,	watchfulness
the	moment	your	inner	being	explodes	all	becomes	light
then	 life	 is	 lived	 in	 a	 totally	 different	 way	 of	 course	 one	 lives	 in	 the	 same
ordinary	 life	 but	 with	 such	 extraordinary	 delight	 with	 such	 extraordinary
intensity,	 love,	 joy	 that	 one	 cannot	 imagine	 it	 it	 is	 not	 comprehensible	 by	 the
mind	mind	 is	 always	wishy-washy	 it	 cannot	 conceive	 the	 total	 intensity	of	 the
state	of	no-mind
and	 awareness	 is	 the	 state	 of	 no-mind	 it	 is	 pure	 silence,	 profound	 silence
depthless,	bottomless,	abysmal	silence	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
that's	 our	 truth;	 that's	 the	 truth	philosophy	 is	 incapable	of	 finding	 it	 because	 it
only	goes	on	 thinking	 about	 it	 it	 has	 to	be	 found	 in	 a	 state	of	 no-thought,	 no-
mind	 in	a	state	of	absolute	clarity	consciousness,	 transparency	no	other	beauty
can	be	compared	with	it	because	it	is	not	one	of	the	beauties	amongst	others	it	is
the	very	source
of	the	experience	of	the	beautiful	the	moment	one	is	aware
the	 whole	 existence	 becomes	 beautiful	 to	 look	 at	 it	 with	 awareness	 is	 a
transformation	not	only	the	person
is	transformed	through	awareness	but	the	whole	universe
it	 remains	 the	 same	 universe	 but	 because	 you	 are	 no	 more	 the	 same	 your
perspective	 is	 no	 more	 the	 same	 your	 attitude	 is	 no	 more	 the	 same	 your
understanding	is	no	more	the	same	then	in	a	sense	it	is	the	same	universe	but	in
another	sense
it	is	a	totally	different	universe	you	have	never	known	it	before	then	everything
starts	having	a	tremendous	beauty	a	luminous	quality
then	everything
is	surrounded	by	a	beautiful	aura	then	everything
has	a	tremendously	graceful	vibe	about	it	one	starts	living	in	the	mysterious,	the
miraculous	then	the	whole	life	is	poetry	the	whole	existence	is	a	song	the	whole
universe
is	 nothing	 but	 dance	 and	 celebration	 knowledge	 needs	 no	 awareness	 you	 can
remain	as	unconscious	as	you	like	still	you	can	go	on	accumulating	knowledge
because	it	is	borrowed,	it	needs	no	awareness	you	are	simply	functioning	like	a
computer	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	are	using	your	mind	as	a	machine	a	memory	machine
and	it	has	the	capacity	to	carry	imprints	to	contain	memory
it	has	immense	capacity,	almost	infinite	they	say	that	a	single	brain	system	can
contain	all	the	libraries	of	the	world	and	one	need	not	be	aware
in	soviet	russia
they	have	developed	a	system	of	education	so	that	children	can	be	taught	even
while	they	are	asleep	they	will	just	have	earphones	while	they	are	sleeping
and	in	a	very	silent	way
almost	in	a	whisper
they	will	be	fed	knowledge	and	their	minds	will	record	it	and	they	will	be	asleep
they	will	not	know	what	 is	being	recorded	but	 in	 the	morning	 if	you	ask	 them
they	 will	 be	 able	 to	 answer	 your	 questions	 they	 will	 be	 themselves	 surprised
because	they	had	never	learned	as	far	as	they	know	but	they	learned	during	their
sleep	if	it	is	possible	during	sleep	then	there	is	no	problem
people	can	be	unconscious
that's	what	they	are
and	 they	 can	 go	 on	 gathering	 knowledge	 but	 wisdom	 is	 a	 totally	 different
phenomenon	the	first
the	most	basic	requirement	is	to	be	aware
because	wisdom	means
experiencing	 the	 truth	 of	 your	 being	 it	 cannot	 be	 experienced	 while	 you	 are
asleep	unaware,	unconscious
all	knowledge	is	borrowed,	hence	ugly,	a	burden	wisdom	has	beauty	because	it	is
your	own	knowledge	is	a	bondage,	wisdom	is	a	freedom	and	because	it	comes
through	awareness	it	makes	you	more	and	more	full	of	light	at	the	ultimate	peak
of	wisdom	one	and	one's	wisdom	are	not	two	separate	things	one	is	simply	wise
there	is	no	wisdom	separate	one's	very	existence	is	wise	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
then	whatsoever	one	does	is	right	then	one	need	not	follow	any	commandment
any	morality,	any	ethics
one	 can	 drop	 all	 these	 burdens	 one's	 wisdom	 is	 enough	 to	 give	 him	 every
moment	the	right	response
the	right	approach
the	right	vision
a	wise	man	 lives	 unburdened	because	 he	 need	not	 depend	on	 any	 ready-made
answers
he	is	capable	of	responding	to	any	challenge	he	is	just	like	a	mirror
reflecting	every	situation	and	acting	accordingly
that's	how	a	sannyasin	has	slowly	slowly	to	grow	into	wisdom
awareness	is	the	way,	wisdom	is	the	goal	christ	is	not	a	christian
he	had	never	heard	the	word	even	he	never	belonged	to	the	church	there	was	no
church	to	belong	to	he	was	a	man	of	awareness
that	is	true	religion
buddha	 had	 never	 heard	 of	 buddhism	 either	 but	 he	 lived	 the	 true	 religion	 the
religion	of	awareness
and	that	is	true	about	all	the	really	authentic	religious	people	of	the	world	others
are	only	phony:	the	polack	pope	and	ayatollah	khomaniac
and	the	shankaracharyas
these	are	all	phony	people	they	have	not	tasted	from	the	well	of	awareness	they
have	not	gone	in
they	are	simply	repeating	like	parrots	the	scriptures	that	have	been	handed	over
to	them	by	tradition
i	don't	give	any	doctrine	 to	my	sannyasins	any	dogma,	any	cult,	any	creed	--	 i
have	none	 i	 only	 insist	 on	one	 thing	be	 aware,	 be	 alert	 in	whatsoever	 you	 are
doing	just	do	it	watchfully,	consciously	and	that	is	enough
because	consciously
one	 can	 never	 do	 anything	 wrong	 consciousness	 is	 bound	 to	 result	 in	 right
actions	and	unconsciously	one	cannot	do	anything	right	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
one	can	try	to	do	right
but	the	total	result	will	always	be	wrong	so	there	is	no	need	to	bother	about	your
small	acts	it	is	better	to	come	to	the	very	source	and	that	is	awareness
discover	it	and	live	out	of	it	and	then	your	life
will	be	just	a	festival	of	lights	friendliness	is	the	highest	peak	of	love	sex	is	the
lowest
love	is	just	in	the	middle	friendliness	is	the	peak
in	sex	only	two	bodies	meet	in	love	two	hearts
in	friendliness	two	spirits	the	first	is	animal
the	second	is	human
the	third	is	divine
but	the	third	can	happen	only	through	awareness	in	fact	the	whole	transformation
from	sex	to	love	from	love	to	friendliness
happens	 through	 the	 ladder	 of	 awareness	 if	 you	 bring	 your	 awareness	 if	 you
focus	 it	 on	 your	 sexuality	 you	 will	 start	 transcending	 sexuality	 awareness	 is
always	a	transcendence	no	other	effort	is	needed
just	watching	your	sexuality	just	understanding	it,	observing	it	is	enough
and	you	can	 see	 its	 animality	you	 can	 see	 the	biological	 bondage	you	can	 see
that	you	are	being	used	by	nature	 for	 its	own	purposes	 --	 and	 this	very	 seeing
takes	you	to	a	new	altitude	to	love
love	is	not	natural
hence	animals	don't	know	about	 it	 it	 is	 a	 transcendence	of	nature	 it	 is	going	a
little	above	nature	it	is	supranatural
but	something	of	sex	still	remains	in	it	as	a	hangover,	as	a	shadow	of	the	past	if
you	watch	your	love
if	you	become	aware	of	your	love	then	the	third	thing	happens	friendliness
i	don't	call	it	even	friendship	because	friendship	reminds	one	of	relationship	love
is	a	relationship
but	friendliness	is	free	of	all	kinds	of	bindings	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
friendliness	is	just	like	fragrance	absolutely	free
to	go	with	the	wind,	to	rise	towards	the	sky	it	has	no	confinement
love	 is	 a	 little	 bit	 possessive,	 jealous	 friendliness	 is	 beyond	 possessiveness
beyond	jealousy
one	can	be	friendly	to	many	people,	to	millions	one	can	be	friendly	to	the	whole
existence	it	is	awareness
that	brings	you	to	that	ultimate	peak	and	once	your	sex	is	transformed	into	love
and	your	love	is	transformed	into	friendliness	you	have	come	home
then	one	can	relax
the	journey	is	over
The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#21
Chapter	title:	None
21	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103215
ShortTitle:	CLAPP21
Audio:
No
Video:
No
Tonight	there	is	an	Enlightenment	Day	Celebration	in	Bhagwan's	silent	presence.
This	chapter	in	the	book	comprises	quotes	on	celebration	and	several	photos.
rejoice!	sing!	dance!
and	dance	so	totally	that	your	egos	melt	and	disappear
dance	so	totally
that	the	dancer	is	no	more	there	but	only	the	dance	remains	then	you	will	din	me
wherever	you	are	wherever	my	sannyasin	celebrate	my	message	is	realized
because	celebration	is	my	message	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
my	 sannyasins	 celebrate	 everything	 celebration	 is	 the	 only	 thing	we	 can	 offer
god
this	i	call	prayer,	this	i	call	being	religious	celebrating	one's	being	it	is	a	gift	from
god	 just	 to	 be	 is	more	 than	 you	 can	 ask	 for	 just	 to	 be	 is	 the	 greatest	miracle
hallelujah
hallelujah
hallelujah
we	are	made	of	the	stuff	called	celebration	rejoice,	rejoice
i	say	unto	you	rejoice
again	and	again!
oh	what	wondrous	life!
i	 rejoice	 in	 the	waves	of	your	 love	 i	 rejoice	 in	 the	starts	above	 i	 rejoice	 in	 the
rolling	thunder	of	your	song
we	are	on	the	threshold
of	something	new	that	is	going	to	happen	to	humanity
we	have	to	fill	the	whole	earth	with	buddhafields!
so	wherever	you	go
wherever	you	are,
never	forget	for	a	moment
that	you	are	not	far	away	from	me	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter
#22
Chapter	title:	None
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
22	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103225
ShortTitle:	CLAPP22
Audio:
No
Video:
No
awareness	is	the	seed	and	blissfulness	is	the	flower	and	the	whole	pilgrimage
is	 between	 these	 two	 points	 awareness	 and	 blissfulness	 we	 are	 living	 in
unawareness	 hence	 bliss	 cannot	 blossom	 in	 awareness	 bliss,	 in	 unawareness
misery	there	are	the	natural	by-products	everybody	wants	to	be	blissful	but	just
by	wanting	it	you	cannot	attain	it	you	will	have	to	follow	the	right	procedure	you
will	have	to	follow	the	law	of	nature	one	has	to	begin	with	awareness	and	then
bliss	 comes	of	 its	 own	accord	you	need	not	worry	 about	 it	 you	need	not	 even
desire	 it,	 it	 comes	 inevitably	 but	 the	 whole	 work	 consists	 of	 becoming	 more
aware
slowly	slowly	getting	rid
of	 unawareness	 unalertness,	 unconsciousness	 it	 is	 possible,	 it	 has	 happened	 to
many	people	it	can	happen	to	everyone
one	 just	 has	 to	 work	 a	 little	 one	 has	 to	 put	 a	 little	 energy	 into	 it	 it	 is	 almost
ignored
and	when	people	try	to	get	the	flowers	without	sowing	the	seeds
naturally	they	end	up	with	plastic	flowers	and	that	is	a	very	ugly	and	frustrating
situation	hence	millions	of	people	live	a	pseudo	kind	of	life	and	when	you	live	a
pseudo	 kind	 of	 life	 you	 also	 die	 in	 a	 pseudo	 way	 you	 have	 never	 lived
authentically	you	cannot	die	even	authentically	your	whole	life
has	 been	 artificial,	 plastic,	 synthetic	 but	 once	 you	 start	working	 on	 awareness
you	are	on	the	right	track	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
then	go	on	moving	deeper	into	it	and	one	day	suddenly,	the	blossoming	suddenly
one	hears
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
and	 the	music	of	 it	 is	 tremendous	and	 the	beauty	of	 it	 is	 indescribable	and	 the
poetry	of	it	is	wordless	but	it	overwhelms	its	fragrance	starts	spreading	to	others
too	whosoever	is	available	and	open	will	be	able	to	feel	it	the	experience	of	bliss
and	the	experience	of	light	are	simultaneous
in	fact	they	are	not	two	separate	things	they	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin	the
moment	the	flower	of	bliss	opens	in	you	suddenly	you	become	aware
of	immense	light	surrounding	it	a	light	which	needs	no	fuel	and	because	it	needs
no	fuel	it	is	eternal	it	cannot	be	exhausted
and	 to	 come	 to	 know	 the	 eternal	 life	 is	 another	 way	 of	 saying	 that	 one	 has
realised	god	or	one	is	liberated
liberated	from	darkness
liberated	 from	 the	 hell	 that	 darkness	 creates	 liberated	 from	 all	 the	 agony	 the
anguish	that	is	bound	to	be	part	of	one's	darkness,	unconsciousness,	unawareness
one	is	not	only	liberated
from	darkness	and	its	by-products	one	is	also	liberated	from	one's	own	self,	the
ego	 the	 idea	 of	 i	 and	 it	 separate	 from	 existence	 liberation	 is	 not	 of	 the	 self
liberation	is	from	the	self	and	the	moment	you	are	liberated	from	the	self	all	the
benediction	 of	 the	whole	 existence	 is	 yours	 the	 first	 thing	 is	 to	 grow	 towards
bliss	wisdom	does	not	come	by	knowledge	it	comes	through	blissfulness	it	has
nothing	 to	 do	 with	 the	 mind	 it	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 even	 with	 the	 heart	 it	 has
something	to	do
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
with	the	innermost	core	of	your	being	the	centre	of	your	existence	there	are	three
concentric	circles	around	your	centre
the	first	is	body
the	body	has	 its	own	kind	of	knowledge	 it	 is	 inbuilt,	you	are	born	with	 it	 it	 is
already	programmed	in	your	very	life	cells	you	are	not	needed	in	it
it	goes	on	working	on	its	own	from	the	cradle	to	the	grave	it	is	a	long	journey,
but	the	body	goes	on	working	it	is	doing	a	thousand	and	one	things	it	is	a	miracle
in	such	a	small	space
the	body	is	doing	so	much	work	that	if	we	want	to	do	all	these	things	we	would
need	a	vast	 factory	covering	hundreds	of	acres	and	 it	 is	doing	 it	 so	noiselessly
you	become	aware	only	when	you	are	ill	when	something	goes	wrong
otherwise	 everything	 goes	 smoothly	 that	 is	 the	 wisdom	 of	 the	 body,	 it	 is
biological	 then	 there	 is	 the	 mind,	 the	 second	 concentric	 circle	 it	 lives	 on
borrowed	 knowledge	 the	 body	 lives	with	 a	 natural,	 biological	 programme	 and
the	mind	lives	with	social	programming	and	that's	what	the	schools,	colleges	and
universities	are	 for:	 to	programme	your	mind	so	 that	you	can	be	 servile	 to	 the
society	a	good	servant,	a	civil	servant	efficient,	usable,	a	commodity,	a	machine
then	there	is	the	third	concentric	circle	of	the	heart
it	has	its	own	way	of	knowing	the	poet,	the	musician,	the	painter,	the	dancer	they
live	from	that	point;	they	don't	think	logically	hence	they	don't	use	the	mind	they
use	feelings	not	thoughts	they	use	love	not	logic
hence	 the	 philosopher	 can	never	 agree	with	 the	 poet	 one	of	 the	 greatest	 greek
philosophers,	 plato	 has	 visualised	 his	 utopia	 --	 he	 calls	 it	 the	 republic	 in	 the
republic	he	does	not	debar	thieves	prostitutes,	gamblers,	drunkards	--	no	but	he
debars	only	one	kind	of	people,	the	poets	the	poets	will	not	be	allowed	to	live	in
his	republic	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
for	the	simple	reason	that	they	are	illogical	people	he	cannot	trust	love
he	trusts	logic,	calculation,	mathematics	these	are	the	three	places	where	people
are	hanging	somewhere	a	few	live	in	the	body	and	follow	its	programme	they	are
almost	like	animals	a	few	live	in	the	mind
they	follow	the	social	programme	they	are	prisoners	of	 the	society	a	particular
society	in	which	they	are	born	a	few	live	in	the	heart
they	are	better	than	the	first	two	but	they	are	also	dominated	by	something	they
don't	know	what	it	is	they	are	possessed	people
they	 do	 things	 but	 it	 is	 very	 unconscious	 even	 sometimes	 they	 rise	 to	 very
beautiful	heights	but	the	whole	rise	is	unconscious	hence	they	have	to	fall	again
and	again	the	poet	only	once	in	a	while	has	a	glimpse	and	then	again	he	is	back
into	 his	 dark	 night	 of	 the	 soul	 the	 real	 wisdom	 happens	 only	when	 you	 have
transcended	all	 three	and	you	have	entered	your	 innermost	shrine	it	 is	absolute
silence
it	is	non-physical
it	is	non-mental
it	is	beyond	the	heart
it	is	not	action,	not	thought,	not	feeling	it	is	just	pure	silence,	virgin	silence	and
with	this	virgin	silence	both	things	explode	first	blissfulness
and	 following	 it	 comes	 wisdom	 a	 great	 insight	 into	 things	 a	 tremendous
perception
into	 the	mystery	 of	 existence	 that	 is	 revelation,	 revelation	of	 the	 divine	 of	 the
godly,	of	the	ultimate	a	man	without	bliss
is	a	tree	without	flowers
a	sky	without	stars
a	man	without	bliss	lives	somehow	carrying	a	great	load	of	meaningless	things
he	drags,	he	cannot	dance;	he	has	nothing	to	dance	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	has	not	experienced	any	splendour	any	joy,	any	meaning
only	 the	 person	 who	 comes	 to	 know	 bliss	 comes	 to	 know	 the	 splendour	 the
immense	splendour	of	existence	then	life	is	lived	as	a	dance,	then	there	is	beauty
then	one	is	not	an	outsider,	one	becomes	an	insider	a	partner	in	the	great	play	of
existence	then	one	is	part	of	 the	flowers	and	the	clouds	and	the	mountains	and
the	stars	then	one	is	not	alienated
but	 this	 can	 happen	 only	 through	 blissfulness	 and	 bliss	 happens	 through
meditation	this	is	the	whole	science
meditation	means	silence
and	silence	brings	bliss
and	bliss	 releases	 the	hidden	 splendour	 in	you	and	 the	moment	you	have	 seen
your	splendour	you	become	capable	of	seeing	 the	splendour	of	 the	whole	 then
life	is	a	sheer	celebration	each	moment	of	it	is	an	eternity	of	joy	failure	comes	or
success,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference	 neither	 does	 failure	 bring	 misery	 nor	 does
success	bring	any	excitement	one	remains	calm	and	cool
one	can	see	the	enemy	and	the	friend	in	the	same	way
because	one	knows
that	the	enemy	can	become	the	friend	the	friend	can	become	the	enemy	they	are
convertible
in	fact	the	man	who	is	enemy	was	a	friend	one	day	there	is	no	way	to	make	an
enemy	without	making	a	 friend	 first	 and	 if	 a	 friend	can	become	an	enemy	 the
enemy	 can	 become	 a	 friend	 so	 they	 are	 not	 so	 separate	 as	 people	 think	 all
dualities	are	complementaries	they	are	not	opposites
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
love	and	hate	are	not	contraries	they	belong	to	the	same	energy	two	extremes	of
the	same	energy,	like	hot	and	cold	but	measurable	by	the	same	thermometer	that
thermometer	shows	they	are	one	energy	it	can	measure	both
blissfulness	brings	this	insight	this	tranquillity,	this	equilibrium,	this	vision	that
there	is	nothing	contradictory	in	existence	that	there	are	no	opposites	hence	there
is	no	need	to	be	anxious,	worried	life	and	death	mean	the	same	and	the	moment
life	and	death	are	the	same	your	cool	becomes	undisturbed	nothing	can	distract,
nothing	can	disturb	but	this	immense	possibility	opens	up	only	with	blissfulness,
never	before	it	a	miserable	person	cannot	think	there	is	no	question	of	seeing	he
cannot	even	think,	he	cannot	even	conceptualise	that	misery	and	bliss	belong	to
the	same	spectrum	it	is	impossible	for	him	to	think	he	only	knows	the	bitter	taste
of	misery	he	has	not	known	bliss	at	all	it	is	only	by	knowing	the	bliss	that	you
suddenly	realise	that	it	is	the	same	energy	that	was	being	felt	as	misery	it	is	not	a
different	energy	then	what	has	made	it	possible	to	become	bliss?
there	has	been	a	bridge
and	that	bridge	i	call	meditation	meditation	is	the	alchemy
of	transforming	the	baser	metal	into	gold	scientists	say	that	the	ingredients	of	a
coal	piece	are	the	same	as	the	ingredients	of	a	diamond	they	are	not	chemically
different	any	piece	of	coal	under	a	certain	heat	pressure	will	become	diamond
just	 that	 heat	 pressure	 is	 needed	 that's	 why	 now	 there	 are	 false	 diamonds
available	the	only	way	to	judge	a	false	diamond	from	the	real	diamond
is	in	a	very	strange	way
the	only	way	is:	the	false	diamond	has	no	flaws	while	the	real	diamond	has	a	few
flaws	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
man	has	improved	upon	nature	the	same	is	true	about	misery	and	bliss	about	hate
and	love
about	birth	and	death
it	is	the	same	energy
it	 just	 has	 to	 pass	 through	 the	 alchemy	 of	 meditation	 it	 has	 to	 pass	 through
silence	and	silence	functions	as	fire	it	burns	all	that	is	ugly,	unnecessary	and	out
comes	 the	 purest	 gold	 that	 purest	 gold	 can	 only	 be	 described	 as	 absolute
coolness	 --	 that	 is	 the	 flavour	 of	 sannyas	 the	 essential	 core	 of	 the	 existence	 is
bliss	existence	is	made	of	the	stuff	called	bliss	if	we	are	not	blissful
the	 simple	 reason	 is	we	have	 forgotten	 the	way	 to	 our	 own	 essential	 core	 just
forgotten	 --	 it	 is	 there	 and	 we	 are	 searching	 everywhere,	 except	 within
meditation	changes	this	course	meditation	means
a	one-hundred-and-eighty	degree	turn	from	without	to	within
and	the	moment	you	face	yourself	you	start	laughing
laughing	 at	 the	 whole	 ridiculousness	 of	 your	 search	 you	 were	 searching	 for
something	 that	 was	 already	 within	 you	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 know	 your	 own
inner	core	and	its	blissfulness
the	whole	 existence	 becomes	 blissful	 instantly	 it	 looks	miserable	 because	 you
are	 miserable	 it	 simply	 reflects	 you,	 it	 is	 a	 mirror,	 it	 echoes	 you	 if	 you	 are
blissful	 the	whole	existence	is	blissful	 then	all	 the	trees	join	in	dance	with	you
and	all	the	birds	join	in	songs	with	you	all	the	rainbows	have	your	colours	then
the	stars	are	not	without,	they	are	within	too	then	the	distinction	between	without
and	within	disappears	there	comes	a	melting
one	becomes	an	intrinsic	part	of	the	whole	that	is	the	ultimate	goal
gautam	 the	 buddha	 has	 said	 that	 the	 taste	 of	 bliss	 is	 the	 taste	 of	 the	 purest
sweetness	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
misery	is	bitter,	very	bitter	because	it	is	part	of	your	unconscious	life	it	is	as	if	a
blind	man	 is	 trying	 to	 find	 a	way	he	 stumbles,	 hurts	himself	 breaks	his	 leg	or
gets	a	fracture	again	starts	groping
hits	his	head	against	a	wall	and	there	is	no	one	to	ask	because	all	others	are	blind
too	they	are	constantly	running	into	each	other	hitting	each	other
a	few	cunning	ones	start	becoming	political	leaders	gathering	blind	people
giving	 them	 beautiful	 names	 giving	 them	 a	 flag	 and	 a	 slogan	 and	 then	 gangs
fight	--	gangs	of	blind	people	christians,	hindus,	mohammedans	or	communists,
fascists,	socialists	 it	may	be	politics	or	religion	but	 the	crowd	consists	of	blind
people	and	the	leaders	are	far	more	blind	than	the	followers	only	then	can	they
lead
they	 are	 more	 perfectly	 blind	 just	 think	 of	 the	 polack	 pope	 or	 ayatollah
khomaniac	 now	 he	 has	 brought	 the	 islamic	 revolution	 to	 iran	 thousands	 of
people	 have	 been	 killed	 the	whole	 country	 is	 being	 destroyed	 because	 of	 this
maniac
he	is	not	only	blind	but	mad	too	but	that	is	perfection
ayatollah	 khomaniac	 is	 a	 perfect	 man	 blindness	 plus	 madness	 is	 a	 rare
combination	once	in	a	while	it	creates	an	adolf	hitler,	a	mussolini	joseph	stalin,
mao	 tse	 tung	 --	 monsters	 not	 men	 in	 darkness,	 in	 blindness,	 nothing	 else	 is
possible	 one	 has	 to	 attain	 to	 a	 little	 awareness	 awareness	 gives	 you	 insight,
vision	 and	 the	 moment	 you	 have	 awareness	 you	 start	 tasting	 bliss	 and	 its
sweetness	life	becomes	a	totally	different	phenomenon	luminous,	fragrant
bliss	is	the	everest
there	 is	nothing	higher	 than	 that	 and	unless	you	 reach	 the	 everest	of	bliss	you
have	not	fulfilled	your	mission	in	life	your	destiny	in	life
hence	one	 feels	always	as	 if	 something	 is	missing	one	cannot	pinpoint	 exactly
what	it	is	because	how	to	pinpoint?
you	have	never	known	it
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	you	can	see	the	gap
you	can	see	something	empty	inside	you	something	is	certainly	missing	you	are
not	whole	--	that	much	is	certain	and	that	which	is	missing	keeps	you	in	agony	in
despair,	 in	 depression,	 in	 a	 pessimistic	 attitude	 because	 you	 are	 unfulfilled
because	you	have	not	 blossomed	you	 are	missing	your	 opportunity	 in	 life	 and
death	is	coming	closer	every	day	so	as	death	comes	closer
one	 becomes	 more	 and	 more	 miserable	 don't	 be	 angry	 at	 old	 men:	 feel
compassion	for	them	because	they	have	missed	their	life	and	that's	why	they	are
continuously	 irritated	for	small	 things	 they	 throw	a	 tantrum	the	basic	 reason	 is
something	else	they	find	any	excuse
they	go	on	trying	to	find	faults	with	everybody	the	real	thing	is	they	know	they
have	missed	and	even	to	recognise	it	is	too	painful,	so	they	go	on	finding	other
excuses	for	their	being	miserable	but	the	real	thing	is	they	are	miserable	because
they	could	have	been	blissful	but	they	never	travelled	to	the	peak,	to	the	everest
which	was	always	possible
just	a	decisiveness	was	needed	sannyas	 is	a	decision,	a	commitment	not	 to	me
but	to	yourself
that	from	now	onwards
you	 will	 put	 more	 and	 more	 energy	 towards	 becoming	 aware,	 blissful,	 silent
because	that	is	the	only	way	you	will	be	able	to	reach	to	the	goal	of	your	life	and
when	it	is	reached
suddenly	the	whole	jigsaw	puzzle	of	life	disappears	all	fits	so	perfectly
that	one	starts	dancing
one	has	arrived	home
bliss	is	a	strange	wine
strange,	because	on	the	one	hand	it	makes	you	fully	aware
and	on	the	other	hand	it	makes	you	fully	intoxicated	intoxicated	with	the	divine
fully	aware	in	your	being
but	the	moment	you	are	fully	aware	in	your	being	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	 divine	wine	 starts	 showering	 on	 you	 and	 it	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	miraculous
events	when	awareness	becomes	intoxicated	it	still	remains	aware
that	is	the	mystery	in	it
it	is	absolute	intoxication	and	absolute	awareness	and	both	are	together,	both	are
one	hence	the	word	mystic
the	 mystic	 is	 called	 a	 mystic	 because	 he	 lives	 the	 greatest	 mystery	 of	 life
incalculable,	immeasurable	incomprehensible	through	the	mind	but	mind	is	not
all
mind	is	the	most	superficial	thing	it	is	good	for	the	marketplace	the	marketplace
is	not	a	mystery	it	is	good	for	mathematical	calculations	it	is	a	good	biocomputer
but	it	knows	nothing	of	the	mystery	it	cannot	know	by	its	very	nature	hence	one
has	to	drop	out	of	the	mind	and	to	drop	out	of	the	mind	is	the	only	way	to	drop
out	of	the	stupidity	of	society	by	dropping	out	of	the	society	you	cannot	drop	out
of	the	mind	but	by	dropping	out	of	the	mind	you	naturally	drop	out	of	the	society
and	 all	 the	 great	 people	 of	 the	 world	 are	 drop-outs	 jesus,	 socrates,	 lao	 tzu,
zarathustra,	buddha	all	are	drop-outs
but	not	drop-outs	like	hippies,	real	drop-outs	dropping	out	of	the	mind
is	only	the	superficial	part	of	their	dropping	then	they	drop	in
dropping	out	is	only	the	first	step	then	they	drop	in
and	that	dropping	in	brings	bliss	and	bliss	brings	the	mysterious,	the	miraculous
awareness	 and	 intoxication	 both	 together	 blissfulness	 is	 our	 birthright	 we	 just
have	to	claim	it
and	meditation	 is	 our	 claim	meditation	 is	 simply	 preparing	 your	 home	 for	 the
guest
the	 guest	 is	 already	 waiting	 on	 the	 door	 but	 your	 inner	 side	 is	 so	 cluttered
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
that	there	is	no	space	for	the	guest	to	come	in	and	the	guest	is	no	ordinary	guest
it	is	the	whole	infinity
all	the	stars	and	the	whole	sky	and	the	infinite	universe
is	waiting	as	a	guest	to	come	in	so	you	will	need	immense	space	you	will	need
bigger	 space	 than	 the	 whole	 universe	 only	 then	 the	 universe	 can	 be
accommodated	and	meditation	does	that	magic	it	throws	out	all	rubbish,	all	junk
and	in	fact	it	is	all	junk,	it	has	no	value	at	all	it	has	not	given	you	anything,	it	has
been	destructive	it	has	been	simply	occupying	the	space	for	no	reason	at	all
and	because	it	is	occupying	the	space	nothing	else	can	come	in
the	cup	has	to	be	emptied,	totally	emptied	meditation	is	the	process	of	emptying
yourself	slowly	slowly	throwing	thoughts	desires,	memories,	fantasies,	out	then
feelings,	moods
the	moment	you	are	totally	a	zero	that	very	moment	the	guest	comes	in	without
even	knocking	on	the	door	without	even	declaring	that	i	am	here	may	i	come	in	-
-	that	much	time	is	not	lost	once	you	are	empty
here	you	are	empty	and	there	the	guest	appears	and	that	guest	is	blissfulness	so
we	have	to	prepare	only	one	thing	an	empty	mind,	a	no-mind
that's	what	i	call	meditation:	a	no-mind	and	the	no-mind	is	the	purest	state	of	our
being	 it	 is	 virgin	 consciousness	 and	 only	 in	 a	 virgin	 consciousness	 is	 god
possible	The	Sound	of	One	Hand	Clapping	Chapter	#23
Chapter	title:	None
23	March	1981	pm	in	Chuang	Tzu	Auditorium	Archive	code:	8103235
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
ShortTitle:	CLAPP23
Audio:
No
Video:
No
the	bible	begins	with	a	very	strange	statement	in	the	beginning	was	the	word	and
god	was	with	the	word
and	god	was	the	word
this	beginning	of	the	bible	has	led	the	whole	western	mind	in	a	wrong	direction
the	word	can	never	be	the	beginning	because	before	the	word	can	even	exist	he
sound	is	needed
to	transform	the	sound	into	the	word	a	mind	is	needed
the	word	can	never	be	the	beginning	the	sound	of	running	water	is	not	a	word
the	sound	of	wind	passing	through	the	pine	trees	is	not	a	word
word	came	much	later	on
word	came	with	man,	not	with	existence	word	is	a	mind	product
it	 is	 giving	meaning	 to	 sound	 sound	 is	 there,	 then	 comes	 the	mind	 then	mind
interprets	the	sound	and	makes	the	word	the	word	is	a	human	creation	if	i	was	to
write	the	bible	again	i	would	say	in	the	beginning	was
the	Sound
of	one	hand
Clapping
a	 soundless	 sound,	 the	 sound	 of	 silence	 itself	 and	 i	 can	 say	 it	 authentically
because	 if	 one	 goes	within	 oneself	 one	 comes	 to	 the	 beginning	 of	 everything
because	you	contain	both
the	 beginning	 and	 the	 end,	 the	 seed	 and	 the	 flower	 first	 you	 have	 to	 drop	 the
words	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
the	moment	you	drop	the	words	the	mind	becomes	useless
because	its	whole	function	is	to	interpret	sounds	into	words	to	create	words	out
of	sound	hence	there	are	so	many	languages	in	the	world	thousands	of	languages
because	the	interpretation	of	a	certain	sound	is	our	interpretation
we	 can	 make	 any	 interpretation	 out	 of	 it	 different	 people,	 different	 tribes,
different	 races	 have	 all	 heard	 the	 same	 sounds	 but	 they	 all	 have	 interpreted
differently	once	interpretation	is	dropped	once	you	are	no	more	interested	in	the
words	but	you	become	interested	in	the	sound	the	whole	function	of	the	mind	is
taken	away	the	very	earth	below	the	mind	is	withdrawn	the	mind	flowers
and	the	death	of	the	mind
is	the	beginning	of	meditation	then	you	are	falling	into	sound	first	then	as	you	go
deeper	into	sound	it	becomes	more	and	more	silence	of	course	that	silence
has	a	certain	rhythm	and	music	to	it	but	it	is	pure	silence
no	word,	no	mind,	no	interpretation	and	this	is	the	beginning
and	remember,	this	is	also	the	end	the	source	is	always	the	goal	only	then	is	life
complete	it	becomes	a	perfect	circle	when	the	source	is	reached	again	you	have
come	home
the	scriptures
have	 been	 dominating	 humanity	 for	 centuries	 rotten	 scriptures,	 out	 of	 date
scriptures	very	primitive,	juvenile,	childish	and	one	can	understand	why	they	are
so	because	they	were	created	by	very	primitive	people	those	people	were	not	yet
aware	 of	 their	 own	 selves,	 of	 the	 vast	 universe	 of	 the	 centre	 of	 it	 all	 --	 the
consciousness	those	scriptures
are	 basically	 father	 and	 mother	 oriented	 that's	 enough	 proof	 that	 they	 were
created	by	childish	psychology
the	child	is	dependent,	helpless	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
he	knows	he	cannot	 survive	without	 the	 father	and	 the	mother	even	 though	he
becomes	 a	 grown-up	 this	 idea	 goes	 on	 like	 a	 hangover	 when	 he	 becomes
independent	 then	 too	 he	 needs	 a	 father-figure	 that	 is	 the	 basic	 need	 of	 the
helpless	 child	 and	 the	 hangover	 of	 a	 helpless	 childhood	 hence	 two	 kinds	 of
religions	and	 two	kinds	of	 scriptures	 are	 in	 existence	 the	 societies	which	were
matriarchal	have	 created	god	 the	mother	more	 societies	 turned	 into	patriarchal
societies	the	woman	was	ignored,	subjugated	and	man	became	dominant
hence	the	religions	claim	god	as	the	father	god	is	neither	a	he	nor	a	she	but	an	it
in	fact	he	is	not	a	person	at	all	but	only	a	presence	a	presence	that	overwhelms
the	 whole	 existence	 you	 are	 part	 of	 that	 presence	 but	 unless	 one	 drops	 these
scriptures	unless	one	 really	burns	 them	inside	one's	being	one	cannot	 find	 true
religion	 one	 remains	 immature,	 ungrown-up	 people	 only	 grow	 old,	 they	 don't
grow	up	and	my	whole	effort	here	is	to	help	you	to	grow	up	to	become	mature,
to	become	grounded,	centred	 to	know	yourself,	because	 that	knowing	becomes
the	key	of	knowing	the	whole	but	the	walls	of	the	scriptures	hindus,	christians,
mohammedans,	 jews	 they	 have	 all	 created	 their	 walls	 those	 walls	 have	 to	 be
completely	demolished	mercilessly	demolished
unless	we	drop	our	hangovers	of	a	primitive	past	we	cannot	live	in	the	present,
sincerely,	totally	and	a	sannyasin	is	to	live	totally,	sincerely	now,	here
mind	is	capable	of	creating	systems	of	thought	but	they	are	like	making	houses
out	of	playing	cards	I	just	a	little	breeze	and	the	whole	house	topples	down	and
all	the	systems	that	mind	creates	are	basically	without	any	foundation	so	if	you
look	into	any	system	created	by	the	mind	and	all	systems	are	created	by	the	mind
all	philosophies,	all	theologies,	all	ideologies	if	you	go	penetrating,	digging	deep
you	will	be	surprised	--	the	structure	is	vast	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	can	be	 lost	 in	 the	structure	but	 if	you	look	for	 the	basic	premises	you	will
find	 they	 are	missing	 there	 is	 no	 foundation	 at	 all	 their	 basic	 assumptions	 are
only	guesswork	they	begin	with	a	priori	ideas	if	you	question	their	a	priori	ideas
they	 are	 absolutely	 incapable	 of	 answering	 them	 hence	 no	 philosophy	 has
satisfied	man	it	satisfies	only	 the	person	who	creates	 it	and	deep	down	he	also
knows,	he	must	know	so	he	has	to	go	on	creating	a	bigger	and	bigger	structure
so	 vast,	 so	 complicated,	 so	 intricate	 that	 people	 are	 lost	 in	 theories	 and	 never
come	to	the	basic	assumption	hence	every	philosophy
has	been	criticised	by	its	opponents	and	profoundly	criticised
but	they	make	the	same	mistake	it	is	bound	to	be	so
it	is	the	mistake	of	the	thinking	process	itself	it	is	like	a	blind	man	thinking	about
light	what	can	he	do?	from	where	will	he	begin?
he	will	begin	with	an	a	priori	idea,	a	guess	he	has	never	experienced
and	my	emphasis	here	is	experiential	so	i	am	not	giving	you	any	ideology,	any
religion	any	cult,	any	creed,	any	dogma	i	am	destroying	all	these	things	my	work
consists	ninety-nine	point	nine	per	cent	in	being	destructive
when	 all	 that	 is	 nonsense	 in	 you	 is	 destroyed	 the	 sense	 that	 you	have	brought
with	your	nature	asserts	itself
when	all	that	has	been	forced	upon	you	is	taken	away
then	your	spontaneity
then	your	natural	being	blossoms	and	that's	what	god	is	all	about	the	blossoming
of	your	spontaneity	mind	is	very	clever	in	conceptualising	give	it	anything	and	it
will	turn	it	into	a	concept	and	once	it	has	succeeded
in	turning	it	into	a	concept	it	looks	so	logical	--	only	looks,	remember	it	looks	so
rational	 --	 but	 only	 looks	 remember	 again,	 it	 is	 not	 rational,	 it	 is	 not	 logical
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
but	 it	 gives	 a	 beautiful	 facade	 of	 logic,	 reason	 and	 the	 people	 who	 are	 not
acquainted	with	the	ways	of	logic	and	reason	fall	victims	to	it
they	become	 imprisoned	 in	concepts	 they	become	christians,	buddhists,	hindus
communists,	atheists,	theists,	and	what	not	this	is	not	the	way	to	search	the	truth
the	most	 fundamental	 thing	 about	 the	 search	 for	 truth	 is	 to	withdraw	 all	 your
concepts	 about	 it	 one	 should	 go	 utterly	 naked	 before	 the	 truth	 with	 no	 ideas
about	it
because	your	idea	will	disfigure,	your	idea	will	distort	your	idea	will	choose	only
that	part	of	the	truth	which	fits	with	it	and	it	will	deny	that	part	which	does	not
fit
and	remember:	a	half-truth,	a	partial	truth	is	more	dangerous	than	an	absolute	lie
for	the	simple	reason	that	if	the	lie	is	absolute	you	are	sooner	or	later	bound	to
find	 it	 but	 if	 there	 is	 something	which	 is	 a	 lie	 and	yet	 carries	 some	 flavour	of
truth	in	it	that	truth	may	prevent	you	from	finding	that	it	is	a	lie	that	truth	may
give	you	enough	consolation	and	you	may	cling,	because	of	the	truth	to	the	lie
a	man	who	wants	to	know	the	truth	should	go	with	open	eyes
with	no	concepts,	with	no	specs	just	naked,	bare	eyes	--	 to	see	what	it	 is	when
you	 don	 t	 have	 any	 idea	 you	 don't	 project	 when	 you	 don't	 project	 you	 don't
choose	when	you	don't	choose
the	whole	truth	enters	your	being	and	jesus	is	right	when	he	says	truth	liberates
lies	create	bondages,	truth	liberates	all	the	religions
have	been	contaminating	humanity	with	beliefs	they	say	unless	you	believe	you
will	never	know	just	the	opposite	is	the	truth	if	you	believe	you	will	never	know
because	 belief	 means	 without	 knowing	 you	 have	 already	 accepted	 a	 certain
prejudice	without	enquiring	into	it,	without	making	any	effort	 to	be	acquainted
with	the	truth	you	have	already	believed
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
now	 there	 is	no	question	of	enquiry	because	enquiry	arises	only	when	 there	 is
doubt	if	you	doubt	you	don't	believe	if	you	believe	you	cannot	doubt	all	beliefs
are	superstructures	to	repress	doubt	but	if	doubt	is	repressed	enquiry	is	destroyed
and	 that's	 how	 people	 have	 been	 living	 imprisoned	 in	 churches,	 temples,
mosques	gurudwaras,	synagogues
imprisoned	in	the	bibles,	the	vedas	the	korans,	the	gitas
imprisoned	in	a	thousand	ways	but	the	imprisonment	is	so	subtle	that	unless	one
is	really	 intelligent	 it	 is	very	difficult	 to	find	 it	but	all	 these	 imprisonments	are
rooted	in	the	single	thing	the	belief
mv	sannyasins	have	to	 learn	not	 to	believe	but	 to	enquire,	 to	explore,	 to	go	on
the	journey	the	adventure	of	the	unknown,	empty-handed	without	any	idea	what
it	is	going	to	be	just	innocent
in	innocence	the	truth	is	known,	not	in	belief	the	innocence	becomes	the	door	to
the	divine	we	are	all	full	of	prejudices	for	the	simple	reason	that	from	the	very
beginning	 as	 the	 child	 is	 born	 the	 parents	 start	 poisoning	 him	with	 their	 own
beliefs
they	 are	 afraid	 that	 if	 he	 becomes	mature	 enough	 to	 ask	 questions,	 to	 enquire
then	there	is	no	way	to	transfer	the	beliefs	that	have	been	transferred	to	them	for
centuries	 they	 think	 it	 is	a	valuable	 treasure	--	 they	only	 think	 they	 themselves
have	 lived	a	 life	of	misery	 they	know	 their	parents	have	 lived	a	 life	of	misery
they	know	in	fact	that	the	whole	humanity	is	living	a	life	of	hell,	but	still	every
parent	 has	 an	 ego-number	 in	 him	 their	 children	 should	 represent	 them	 they
should	be	as	miserable	as	they	are	if	more,	then	that	is	better,	some	improvement
they	 are	 afraid	 to	 leave	 their	 children	 in	 freedom	 hence	 they	 go	 on	 piling	 up
prejudices	the	children	have	to	be	taken	to	the	church	they	have	to	be	baptised
they	have	to	be	given	religious	education	and	this	all	has	to	happen	before	their
sexual	maturity	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
before	the	age	of	fourteen	hence	a	strange	fact	has	now	become	well-known	that
people's	mental	age
is	somewhere	between	twelve	and	fourteen	because	that	is	the	time
when	they	start	becoming	sexually	mature	now	they	cannot	be	conditioned	any
more	sexual	maturity	means
nature	 has	 completed	 its	 process	 the	 person	 is	 individual	 as	 far	 as	 nature	 is
concerned	he	may	not	be	adult
according	to	the	political	ideas	prevalent	in	a	country
in	 some	 countries	 eighteen	 is	 the	 time	when	 he	 is	 capable	 of	 voting	 in	 some
countries,	twenty-one	but	in	fact	nature	has	given	him	all	the	right	to	be	a	parent
what	to	say	about	voting?
by	 the	 time	 a	 child	 is	 fourteen	 or	 thirteen	 the	 girls	 become	 mature	 one	 year
earlier	the	child	is	capable	of	reproducing	children	what	more	responsibility	can
there	be?
hence	 now	 no	more	 conditioning	 is	 possible	 but	 whatsoever	 conditioning	 has
happened	has	retarded	his	mind
now	he	will	live
according	to	that	conditioning	for	his	whole	life	he	will	never	grow	beyond	that
mental	age	he	may	become	eighty,	ninety	or	he	even	may	live	for	a	century,	but
he	 will	 remain	 as	 far	 as	 psychology	 is	 concerned	 only	 somewhere	 between
twelve	and	fourteen	and	this	disparity
between	the	age	of	fourteen	and	the	age	of	a	hundred
is	the	root	cause	of	all	misery	the	body	goes	on	growing
and	the	mind	remains	stuck	and	the	gap	becomes	unbridgeable	the	mind	should
grow	each	moment	with	each	breath
the	 learning	 should	 never	 stop	 --	 it	 cannot	 stop	 it	 is	 life's	 most	 valuable
phenomenon	the	learning	should	continue	to	the	last	breath	a	person	should	die
learning,	still	learning	learning	about	death
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
life	he	has	seen
he	has	learned	so	much	through	life	he	should	not	miss
this	ultimate	opportunity	of	 learning	this	 is	 the	pinnacle	of	 life	death	is	not	 the
end
it	appears	the	end
only	 to	 those	whose	minds	are	 retarded	 to	 socrates	 it	 is	not	 the	end	 --	 another
beginning	to	the	buddha	it	is	not	the	end	but	a	tremendous	beginning,	a	freedom
freedom	from	the	confinement	of	the	body	of	the	mind
death	 is	 opening	 a	 vaster	 dimension	 than	 one	 has	 ever	 known	 before	 but	 that
needs	 intelligence	 that	 does	 not	 need	 a	 retarded	 mind	 it	 needs	 a	 constantly
growing	mind	that's	what	i	mean	when	i	say	transcend	all	prejudices
because	those	prejudices	are	holding	you	back	life	goes	ahead
and	you	are	holding	somewhere	back	a	part	of	you	remains	in	the	past	a	part	of
you	 has	 to	 live	 in	 the	 present	 only	 a	 partial	 life	 --	 and	 a	 partial	 life	 is	 never
fulfilled,	 it	 remains	 discontented	 drop	 all	 prejudices,	 drop	 all	 conditionings	 so
that	you	are	reborn
that's	what	sannyas	is	all	about	a	rebirth	the	beginning	of	enquiry,	the	beginning
of	 seeking	 the	 beginning	 of	 searching	 --	 on	 your	 own	 the	 dropping	 of	 the
borrowed	knowledge	and	learning
so	that	you	can	have	some	insight	of	your	own	only	your	own	insight	is	going	to
give	 you	 freedom,	 love,	 blessing,	 benediction	 contemplation	 has	 been
proclaimed	 as	 the	 panacea	 it	 is	 not	 --	 it	 is	 the	 best	 that	 the	mind	 can	 do	 but
whatsoever	the	mind	can	do	is	going	to	be	a	barrier
yes,	contemplation	is	the	finest	work	of	art	as	far	as	mind	is	capable	of	it	is	as	if
it	has	created	a	very	transparent	glass	wall	around	you	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
you	cannot	see	the	wall
and	you	can	see	beyond	the	wall	hence	you	can	think	that	there	is	no	wall	you
are	free
you	can	see	the	flowers	in	the	garden	the	birds	on	the	wing,	the	sun	rising,	the
starry	night	everything	gives	you	the	idea	that	you	are	free	but	if	you	take	a	few
steps	 to	 reach	 the	 flowers	 then	you	will	 come	 to	know	 that	you	are	not	 free	 a
very	transparent	glass	wall	prevents	you	contemplation	is	a	glass	wall	the	most
beautiful	 that	 mind	 can	 do	 but	 as	 far	 as	 the	 soul	 is	 concerned	 it	 is	 the	 most
dangerous	thing	because	one	can	easily	see	a	brick	wall,	a	stone	wall	and	when
you	see	yourself	behind	a	stone	wall	you	don't	like	it,	you	want	to	get	out	of	it
you	 start	 finding	methods	 how	 to	 destroy	 it	 but	when	you	 are	 living	 behind	 a
glass	wall	then	even	the	desire	to	get	out	rarely	arises	because	it	gives	you	a	false
sense	of	freedom	one	has	to	transcend	contemplation	these	are	the	three	things	to
be	remembered	one	is	concentration	--	that	is	what	creates	science	it	deals	with
the	objective	reality	it	is	a	mind	process
the	second	is	contemplation	--	it	creates	literature	poetry,	painting
the	whole	dimension	of	aesthetics	it	is	beautiful
but	it	creates	a	new	kind	of	bondage	far	more	subtle
and	the	third	thing	is	meditation	meditation	is	not	of	the	mind	but	going	out	of
the	mind
transcending	the	mind
the	moment	you	transcend	the	mind	you	enter	into	the	world	of	no-mind	and	that
is	the	world	of	real	freedom	now	you	are	no	longer	surrounded	by	prison	walls
the	whole	existence	is	yours	and	the	joy	that	it	contains	and	the	beauty	and	the
splendour	and	the	ecstasy	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
man	is	man	only	because	he	has	a	mind	of	course	there	are	animals	and	trees	and
rocks	which	don't	have	this	same	type	of	mind	as	man	has
hence	mind	has	been	praised,	immensely	praised	from	the	schools	to	the	college
to	the	university	we	are	cultivating	mind	--	to	create	human	beings	the	more	you
are	 sophisticated	 in	 your	 mind	 the	 more	 powerful	 you	 will	 be	 in	 the	 human
society	 you	 will	 become	 a	 scientist	 a	 physicist,	 a	 nuclear	 physicist	 you	 may
become	a	politician	you	may	become	a	great	famous	poet	or	a	painter	you	will
be	 powerful	 in	 some	 way	 your	 ego	 will	 be	 immensely	 satisfied	 but	 the
satisfaction	of	the	ego	is	not	real	contentment
to	 be	 famous	 means	 nothing	 when	 you	 are	 famous	 it	 means	 only	 something
when	you	are	not	famous	once	you	are	famous	you	can	see	that	it	was	all	sheer
nonsense	what	does	it	matter
how	many	people	know	about	you?
two	hundred	or	two	million	or	two	hundred	million	what	does	it	matter?	--	it	is
not	 true	life	name	and	fame	don't	stand	as	foundations	for	a	real,	authentic	life
which	has	joy	in	it	which	lives	in	a	dance,	in	a	song,	in	a	celebration	if	you	look
backwards
man	is	really	on	the	top	of	the	ladder	as	far	as	animals	are	concerned	but	if	you
look	upwards
there	are	still	a	few	more	rungs	you	have	not	yet	come	to	 the	ultimate	you	are
still	on	the	way,	on	the	bridge	you	have	to	transcend	a	few	things	more	friedrich
nietzsche
has	a	few	immensely	significant	insights	one	of	his	insights	is,	he	says	that	day
will	 be	 the	 gloomiest	 in	 history	 when	 man	 will	 stop	 surpassing	 himself	 i
absolutely	agree	with	this	man	of	course	he	was	not	a	buddha	not	an	awakened
person
just	at	the	last	moment	he	went	wrong	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
one	can	go	wrong	at	any	moment	in	the	journey	even	from	the	last	rung	of	the
ladder	 one	 can	 fall	 it	 is	 a	 game	 of	 snakes	 and	 ladders	 one	 can	 fall	 from	 the
number	ninety-nine	because	there	is	also	one	snake	waiting	for	you	nietzsche	fell
from	the	last	point	and	became	a	madman
when	you	fall	from	such	a	height	what	else	can	you	expect?
one	is	going	to	go	berserk	he	died	a	madman
but	he	was	very	close	to	buddhahood	that	is	the	risk	of	all	those	people	who	want
to	reach	to	the	highest	peak	if	you	want	to	reach	the	highest	peak	you	have	to	be
courageous
and	you	have	 to	be	 careful	 and	you	have	 to	know	 that	 the	higher	you	 rise	 the
more	 cautious	 you	 become	 because	 the	 path	 becomes	 narrow	 and	 the	 height
becomes	bigger	and	if	you	slip	just	a	single	wrong	step
and	you	will	fall	into	the	abyss	but	he	had	reached	very	close	the	only	thing	that
was	missing	was	meditation	otherwise	he	would	have	blossomed	as	a	buddha	he
had	all	the	capacity
i	agree	with	him
that	unless	man	surpasses	himself	he	remains	stuck	it	is	not	the	end	of	evolution,
there	 is	much	more	yet	and	 that	much	more	can	only	be	 lived	by	 transcending
the	mind
because	mind	is	what	makes	you	a	man	no-mind	will	be	what	will	make	you	a
superman	that	was	the	idea	of	friedrich	nietzsche	he	tried	hard	to	be	a	superman
but	he	was	not	aware	that	one	thing	very	essential	was	missing	meditation	was
missing
my	sannyasins	can	reach	 to	 the	highest	 top	without	any	fear	of	falling	because
from	the	very	beginning	they	have	to	be	meditative	from	the	very	beginning
they	have	to	learn	the	art	of	being	a	no-mind	and	that	releases	awareness	by	the
time	they	reach	to	the	heights	they	are	so	full	of	awareness	there	is	no	possibility
of	slipping	or	committing	a	mistake
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
they	can	surpass	humanity
and	that	is	the	greatest	experience	in	life	when	you	surpass	the	mind
and	all	that	mind	consists	of	when	you	suddenly	start	flying	because	there	is	no
burden	 left	 mind	 is	 a	 weight	 that	 keeps	 you	 down	 that	 keeps	 you	 gravitating
towards	the	earth	the	moment	the	paperweight	is	removed	.	.	.
mind	 is	 just	 a	 paperweight	 and	 a	 very	 heavy	 paperweight	 you	 can	 call	 it	 the
soulweight	once	it	is	removed	the	soul	is	free	it	is	on	its	wings	already	and	that	is
what	ecstasy	is	to	be	on	the	wing	in	the	infinite	sky	soaring	towards	the	stars
the	society	consists	of	many	things	of	religion,	of	nationality,	of	race	of	blood,	of
colour	--	and	all	that	crap	and	everybody	is	drowning	in	the	crap	and	if	you	try	to
get	out	of	it	 the	others	who	are	drowning	become	very	angry	they	start	pulling
you	back,	they	won't	allow	you	a	politician	had	gone	for	a	morning	walk	and	he
saw	a	small	boy	catching	crabs	and	putting	them	into	an	open	bucket	and	many
of	them	were	trying	to	get	out	the	politician	looked	and	he	said,	my	son	you	are
making	so	much	effort	to	catch	these	people
but	they	will	get	out
why	don't	you	cover	up	your	bucket?
the	boy	said,	you	don't	be	worried,	sir	they	are	all	politicians
when	 one	 starts	 getting	 out	 others	 pull	 him	 down,	 no	 cover	 is	 needed	 i	 am
perfectly	experienced	with	these	politicians	the	society	is	a	political	unit	if	you
want	 to	 get	 out	 of	 it	 first	 they	 will	 pull	 you	 in	 every	 possible	 way	 they	 will
threaten	you
they	will	call	you	all	kinds	of	names	dropouts,	escapists
and	i	don't	think	there	is	anything	wrong	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
if	you	are	dropping	out	of	a	pit	full	of	crap	there	is	nothing	wrong	in	escaping
from	it	any	intelligent	person	will	do	that	only	fools	can	live	 in	 it,	only	utterly
stupid	a	sannyasin	has	to	live	his	life	intelligently	not	being	a	part	of	the	crowd
psychology	the	mobocracy
he	has	to	be	an	individual	he	has	to	be	a	rebel
he	has	to	assert	himself
he	has	to	deny	all	efforts	of	being	manipulated	he	has	to	cut	himself	off	from	all
kinds	of	 slaveries	 only	 then	 there	 is	 a	 possibility	 of	 seeing	 the	 light	 only	 then
there	is	a	possibility	of	realising	your	potential	only	then	will	you	enter	into	the
kingdom	of	god	which	is	within	you
the	only	anxiety	in	man's	life	is	that	of	death	other	anxieties	are	just	shadows	of
it	by-products	of	it
howsoever	far	removed	from	it	but	if	you	go	seeking	and	searching	for	the	root
cause
you	will	always	see	death
people	are	afraid	of	 losing	money	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 they	know	 that	 if
money	 is	 there,	 there	 is	 some	 safety	 against	 death,	 illness,	 disease,	 old	 age
people	cling	to	the	family	for	the	simple	reason	that	who	is	going	to	take	care	of
me	if	i	am	old	disease	is	there,	i	become	crippled,	paralysed	then	who	is	going	to
take	care	of	me?
so	it	is	better	to	suffer	in	the	family	rather	than	becoming	free	of	it	people	live	in
all	 kinds	 of	 societies	 and	 sacrifice	 all	 kinds	 of	 things	 which	 are	 of	 immense
value,	 for	 the	 simple	 reason	 that	 the	 society	provides	 security,	 safety	but	 deep
down	it	is	always	death	that	is	the	source	from	where	anxiety	arises	and	the	only
way	to	go	beyond	anxiety	is	to	know	that	your	innermost	core	is	deathless	even
if	you	want	 to	die	you	cannot	die	 the	people	who	commit	suicide	only	destroy
their	body
1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
not	their	souls
they	 cannot,	 it	 is	 indestructible	 and	 this	 is	 the	 most	 precious	 gift	 that	 comes
through	meditation	you	become	aware	of	 something	 eternal	 in	you	which	was
there	before	your	birth	which	will	be	 there	even	after	your	death	your	body	 is
part	 of	 the	 earth	 it	will	 dissolve	 into	 the	 earth	 something	will	 go	 to	 the	water
something	will	go	to	the	fire	something	will	go	to	the	earth	something	will	go	to
the	 air	 something	 will	 go	 to	 the	 sky	 all	 the	 constituents	 of	 the	 body	 will	 be
dispersed	back	 to	 their	original	 sources	and	mind	will	 simply	evaporate	 it	 is	 a
by-product	 of	 all	 the	 body	 constituents	 once	 they	 disintegrate	 the	 mind
disintegrates	mind	 is	 not	 an	 entity	 hence	mind	 is	 going	 to	 die	 and	we	 are	 too
much	 attached	 with	 the	 mind	 so	 we	 live	 under	 the	 fear	 of	 death	 meditation
means
becoming	detached	from	the	mind	becoming	a	witness	of	the	mind	looking	at	the
mind	as	separate	from	you	that's	what	actually	it	is	you	can	see	thoughts	passing
by	you	can	see	desires	passing	by	you	can	see	the	whole	traffic	that	goes	on	in
the	mind
the	memories,	 the	 fantasies,	 the	past,	 the	 future	all	kinds	of	 things	are	passing
you	can	just	stand	by	the	side	of	the	road	and	you	can	see	the	whole	traffic	--	you
are	not	it	you	are	the	watcher,	you	are	the	witness	and	the	witness	is	beyond
the	seer	is	never	the	seen	the	observer	is	never	the	observed	this	very	experience
is	transcendence	and	once	you	know	that	you	are	not	the	mind	the	fear	of	death
simply	disappears	as	if	it	has	never	been	there	in	the	first	place	suddenly	you	are
in	the	world	1/08/07
Copyright	Osho	International	Foundation	1994
Osho's	books	on	CD-ROM,	published	and	unpublished	Query:-
of	 the	 deathless,	 the	 eternal	 there	 is	 no	 anxiety	 any	more	 one	 is	 at	 ease	 with
existence	in	a	deep	let-go
a	tremendous	relaxation
that	relaxation	is	the	ultimate	goal	of	sannyas	to	know	it	is	to	know	all
to	miss	it	is	to	miss	all
Table	of	Contents
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
Chapter	title:	None
